# PDF: C:/Users/Paolo/.claude/projects/E--CLAUDE-PAOLO-BACA-MANRIQUE/8932a6b7-d75c-4461-baf8-e05cb23af124/tool-results/webfetch-1776626753587-s1aoo3.pdf — 69 pages


===== PAGE 1 =====
Young Learners
Young Learners English Tests (YLE)
Handbook for Teachers
Starters Movers Flyers

===== PAGE 2 =====
The three levels A wide range of text books and teaching materials which are used in
classrooms with young learners throughout the world are reviewed as
Cambridge English: Young Learners consists of three key levels of
part of the ongoing test development process.
assessment: Starters, Movers and Flyers.
The tests reflect the main content areas which frequently occur in
The aims of the tests are to:
these materials (topic, vocabulary, etc.) as does the presentation of
(cid:698)(cid:886) sample relevant and meaningful language use the test material. Both text and pictures are presented in a clear and
(cid:698)(cid:886) measure accurately and fairly attractive way, taking into account the age and background of the
(cid:698)(cid:886) present a positive first impression of international tests intended candidates.
(cid:698)(cid:886) promote effective learning and teaching The table below indicates the common characteristics and variations
(cid:698)(cid:886) encourage future learning and teaching. in the different levels of the tests.
The three tests together form a bridge to take children learning
English as a second language from beginner to basic user level (A2).
Overall length Number of tasks/parts Number of items
Starters
Listening approx 20 mins 4 20
Reading & Writing 20 mins 5 25
Speaking 3–5 mins 5 –
Total total approx 45 mins
Movers
Listening approx 25 mins 5 25
Reading & Writing 30 mins 6 40
Speaking 5–7 mins 4 –
Total total approx 65 mins
Flyers
Listening approx 25 mins 5 25
Reading & Writing 40 mins 7 50
Speaking 7–9 mins 4 –
Total total approx 75 mins

===== PAGE 3 =====
CONTENTS
Preface
This handbook contains the specifications for all three levels of Cambridge English: Young Learners – Starters, Movers and Flyers. It is designed for
use by teachers who are preparing candidates for the tests, or who are considering doing so.
For further information on any of the Cambridge English examinations and teaching qualifications, or if you need further copies of this
handbook, please email ESOLinfo@CambridgeESOL.org
Contents
About Cambridge ESOL 2 Movers 19
The world’s most valuable range of English qualifications 2 Listening 19
Key features of Cambridge English exams 2 Reading & Writing 21
Proven quality 2 Speaking 23
Introduction to Cambridge English: Young Learners 3 Topics 24
Who is Cambridge English: Young Learners for? 3 Grammar and structures list 25
What level are the tests? 3 Alphabetic vocabulary list 27
Special circumstances 3
Flyers 31
Support 4
Listening 31
Exam sessions 4
Reading & Writing 33
Further information 4
Speaking 35
The three syllabuses 4
Topics 36
Can Do summary 5
Grammar and structures list 37
Starters 6 Alphabetic vocabulary list 39
Listening 6
Combined Lists 43
Reading & Writing 9
Starters and Movers
Speaking 11
combined alphabetic vocabulary list 43
Topics 12
Starters, Movers and Flyers
Grammar and structures list 13
combined alphabetic vocabulary list 48
Alphabetic vocabulary list 15
Starters, Movers and Flyers
combined thematic vocabulary list 55
Starters, Movers and Flyers
combined grammatical vocabulary list 61
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 1

===== PAGE 4 =====
ABOUT CAMBRIDGE ESOL
About Cambridge ESOL The world’s most valuable range of English
qualifications
Cambridge English: Young Learners, also known as Cambridge Young Cambridge ESOL offers the world’s leading range of qualifications
Learners English (YLE), is developed by University of Cambridge ESOL for learners and teachers of English. Over 3.5 million people take our
Examinations (Cambridge ESOL), a not-for-profit department of the exams each year in 130 countries.
University of Cambridge.
Cambridge ESOL offers assessments across the full spectrum of
Cambridge ESOL is one of three major exam boards which form language ability.
the Cambridge Assessment group (Cambridge Assessment). More
We provide examinations for general communication, for professional
than 8 million Cambridge Assessment exams are taken in over 160
and academic purposes and also specialist legal and financial English
countries around the world every year.
qualifications.
All of our exams are aligned to the principles and approach of the
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR).
To find out more about Cambridge English exams and the CEFR, go to
www.CambridgeESOL.org/CEFR
In addition to our own programmes of world-leading research, we
work closely with professional bodies, industry professionals and
governments to ensure that our exams remain fair and relevant to
candidates of all backgrounds and to a wide range of stakeholders.
Key features of Cambridge English exams
Cambridge English exams:
(cid:698)(cid:886) are based on realistic tasks and situations so that preparing for
their exam gives learners real-life language skills
(cid:698)(cid:886) accurately and consistently test all four language skills – reading,
writing, listening and speaking – as well as knowledge of language
structure and its use
(cid:698)(cid:886) encourage positive learning experiences, and seek to achieve a
positive impact on teaching wherever possible
(cid:698)(cid:886) are as fair as possible to all candidates, whatever their national,
ethnic and linguistic background, gender or disability.
Proven quality
Cambridge ESOL’s commitment to providing exams of the highest
possible quality is underpinned by an extensive programme of
research and evaluation, and by continuous monitoring of the
marking and grading of all Cambridge English exams. Of particular
importance is the rigorous set of procedures which are used in the
production of question papers.
All systems and processes for designing, developing and delivering
exams and assessment services are certified as meeting the
internationally recognised ISO 9001:2008 standard for quality
management and are designed around five essential principles:
(cid:698)(cid:886) Validity – are our exams an authentic test of real-life English?
(cid:698)(cid:886) Reliability – do our exams behave consistently and fairly?
(cid:698)(cid:886) Impact – does our assessment have a positive effect on teaching
and learning?
(cid:698)(cid:886) Practicality – does our assessment meet learners’ needs within
available resources?
(cid:698)(cid:886) Quality – how we plan, deliver and check that we provide
excellence in all of these fields
How these qualities are brought together is outlined in our
publication Principles of Good Practice, which can be downloaded free
from www.CambridgeESOL.org/Principles
2 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 5 =====
ABOUT CAMBRIDGE ESOL
Introduction to Cambridge English: Young Marks and results
Learners
In the Reading and Writing paper in Starters, Movers and Flyers correct
Cambridge English: Young Learners gives a reliable and consistent spelling is required. In Part 2 of the Listening paper some misspellings
measure of how well a child is doing in learning English. are allowed. Candidates must follow the rubrics carefully and keep
within the word limits. The completed question papers are returned
Cambridge English: Young Learners encourages younger children to
to Cambridge to be marked. The results are then issued as soon as
work towards three certificates: Starters, Movers and Flyers. Tests
possible (normally within about two weeks of receipt of the scripts by
are designed to make learning fun and children are motivated by
Cambridge ESOL).
working towards certificates and earning the ‘shields’ that record their
progress. Results are reported in a way designed to provide positive
encouragement to the learners. All candidates who complete their
Cambridge English: Young Learners provides an appropriate first step
test receive a certificate, which focuses on what they can do (rather
towards other Cambridge English examinations designed for young
than what they can’t do) and gives the children credit for having taken
people, e.g. Cambridge English: Key (KET) for Schools and Cambridge
part in the test.
English: Preliminary (PET) for Schools.
The Cambridge English: Young Learners tests are high facility tests.
The tests take account of relevant research in a number of areas and
This means that most candidates do very well. There are inevitably
the specific needs of prospective test users (children, parents and
minor differences in the difficulty level across tests. In order to equate
teachers).
different test versions, the shield score boundaries are set so that
In producing the tests, particular attention is paid to the educational all candidates’ results relate to the same scale of achievement. This
consequences of using a language test with young learners and the means, for example, that the Shield 4 boundary may be set at a
following areas are carefully considered: slightly different raw score across versions.
(cid:698)(cid:886) current approaches to curriculum design and pedagogy for Special circumstances
young learners, including recent coursebooks and other resource
materials Cambridge English exams are designed to be fair to all test takers.
(cid:698)(cid:886) children’s cognitive and first language development This commitment to fairness covers:
(cid:698)(cid:886) the potential influence of test methods, including the familiarity
(cid:698)(cid:886) Special arrangements
and appropriacy of different task types, question formats,
These are available for candidates with a permanent or long-term
typography and layout
disability. Consult the Cambridge ESOL Centre Exams Manager
(cid:698)(cid:886) probable variation between different first language groups and
(CEM) in your area for more details as soon as you become aware of
cultures.
a candidate who may need special arrangements.
Above all, it is essential for the testing experience to have a positive
impact on the children’s future language learning. (cid:698)(cid:886) Special consideration
Cambridge ESOL will give special consideration to candidates
Who is Cambridge English: Young Learners for?
affected by adverse circumstances such as illness or bereavement
immediately before or during an exam. Applications for special
Cambridge English: Young Learners is designed to offer a
consideration must be made through the centre no later than 10
comprehensive approach to testing the English of learners between
working days after the exam date.
the ages of 7 and 12.
(cid:698)(cid:886) Malpractice
What level are the tests?
Cambridge ESOL will investigate all cases where candidates are
suspected of copying, collusion or breaking the exam regulations
The Cambridge English: Young Learners tests are aligned with the
in some other way. Results may be withheld while they are
Council of Europe’s Common European Framework of Reference for
being investigated, or because we have found an infringement of
Languages, at Levels A1 and A2. The Flyers test is roughly equivalent
regulations. Centres are notified if a candidate’s results have been
to Cambridge English: Key, also known as Key English Test (KET), and
investigated.
Cambridge English: Key for Schools in terms of difficulty, but the lexis
and contexts covered are suitable for younger children.
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 3

===== PAGE 6 =====
ABOUT CAMBRIDGE ESOL
Support Official preparation materials
A feature of Cambridge English exams is the outstanding support we A comprehensive range of official Cambridge English preparation
offer to teachers and candidates. materials are available from University of Cambridge ESOL
Examinations (Cambridge ESOL) and Cambridge University Press.
Support for teachers
Materials include printed and digital resources to support teachers
and help learners prepare for their exam.
Teacher Support website
This website provides an invaluable, user-friendly resource for all Find out more at www.CambridgeESOL.org/exam-preparation
teachers preparing students for our exams. Key features include:
Exam sessions
(cid:698)(cid:886) an interactive students file-sharing area which allows you to
download materials (including lesson plans) created by both Cambridge English: Young Learners is available as a paper-based test.
Cambridge ESOL and other teachers; you can also upload your Candidates must be entered through a recognised Cambridge ESOL
own teaching materials Examination Centre. Find your nearest centre at
(cid:698)(cid:886) an ‘Advice for Teachers’ section offering teaching tips and www.CambridgeESOL.org/centres
strategies for every paper of each exam
(cid:698)(cid:886) an events area that allows you to search for events and Further information
conferences according to location and exam
(cid:698)(cid:886) moderated discussion forums Contact your local Cambridge ESOL centre, or Cambridge ESOL
(cid:698)(cid:886) links to publishers and published materials direct (using the contact details on the back cover of this handbook)
(cid:698)(cid:886) access to exam handbooks, sample papers, exam reports, for:
qualifications and further information on teaching. (cid:698)(cid:886) copies of the regulations
Visit the Teacher Support website at (cid:698)(cid:886) details of the entry procedure
www.teachers.CambridgeESOL.org (cid:698)(cid:886) current fees
(cid:698)(cid:886) more information about Cambridge English: Young Learners and
other Cambridge English exams.
The three syllabuses
Cambridge English Teacher
The syllabuses for the three levels follow. They describe the topics,
Developed by Cambridge University Press and University of
the grammar and structures, the lexis and the tasks on which the
Cambridge ESOL Examinations (Cambridge ESOL), Cambridge
tests are based.
English Teacher provides opportunities for English teachers to engage
in continuing professional development through online courses, share These are test syllabuses. Considerable care has been taken to reflect
best practice and network with other ELT professionals worldwide. the language covered in a wide range of Primary English courses and
materials.
For more information on how to become a Cambridge English
Teacher, visit www.CambridgeEnglishTeacher.org A guiding principle for the tests is a desire to close the distance
between the children’s experiences of learning and of testing. Tasks
Seminars and events for teachers
are intended to test the meaningful use of language in clear, relevant,
We offer a wide range of seminars and other events for teachers accessible contexts. Children must know what to expect when they
working with our exams. They provide additional information and sit down to take the tests, or the unfamiliarity could cause anxiety.
support for teachers who are familiar with the exams, or update For this reason, we publish the full vocabulary and grammar and
teachers on new or revised exams. Find out more about events in structures lists. Teachers should familiarise the children with the test
your country at format whilst continuing their normal teaching programmes and
www.teachers.CambridgeESOL.org/events concentrate on teaching through a focus on meaning and context.
Country-specific websites In general, the language input to the tests is likely to be of a standard
British English variety, although care is taken to avoid terms which
Dedicated Cambridge ESOL websites are also available in some
might cause confusion for learners of American English. Some
countries. Please visit www.CambridgeESOL.org for more
American English terms are included in the vocabulary lists. Versions
information.
of the Listening test contain both British and American accents.
Support for candidates In terms of a candidate’s output, both standard British English and
standard American English are equally acceptable.
Information and advice for parents whose children are taking
Cambridge English: Young Learners can be found at
www.CambridgeESOL.org/younglearners
Support materials from Cambridge ESOL
Support materials for teachers such as past papers and exam reports
can be downloaded free from
www.teachers.CambridgeESOL.org
4 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 7 =====
ABOUT CAMBRIDGE ESOL
Can Do summary
The tables below give some examples at each Cambridge English: Young Learners level of typical general ability, plus ability in each of the skill areas and
in a range of contexts (social & leisure and school). These statements are linked to the CEFR.
Starters
Typical abilities Listening & Speaking Reading & Writing
Overall general ability CAN understand simple sentences about things around CAN recognise the letters of the English alphabet.
them, like ‘This is a chair’, ‘I like my school’, ‘That’s my
CAN write the letters of the English alphabet and spell
pen’.
their name and simple words.
CAN respond to personal questions on topics such as age,
family and their home.
Social & Leisure CAN understand simple expressions of communication, CAN read short, simple words and the names of some
such as ‘Hello’, ‘How are you?’, ‘Thank you’. objects, such as animals, toys, clothes.
CAN respond to simple expressions of communication CAN write simple sentences about themselves and their
with ‘Yes, please’, ‘Sorry’, ‘I don’t understand’. family.
School CAN understand and follow simple classroom instructions CAN understand simple written instructions, for example
given by the teacher, such as ‘Open your book’, ‘Read the how they should do an exercise in their course book.
question’, ‘Listen to me’.
CAN recognise and copy words, phrases and short
CAN listen to and repeat words and phrases appropriate sentences from a text, a book, or the board in the
to the level after their teacher. classroom.
Movers
Typical abilities Listening & Speaking Reading & Writing
Overall general ability CAN agree or disagree with someone, using phrases such CAN understand simple sentences if they read them
as ‘I think so’, ‘You are right’, ‘I don’t think so’. slowly and several times.
CAN ask questions and use fixed expressions, such as CAN write simple sentences, using words given to them.
‘How much is/are …?’, ‘What’s the matter?’, ‘I’m good
at …’.
Social & Leisure CAN understand when somebody talks about their family CAN understand simple stories and shorter texts with the
or friends in simple sentences. help of pictures and drawings.
CAN ask somebody about how they are and what they like CAN write about what they like doing in their free time,
doing and answer similar questions. using words given to them.
School CAN understand instructions given by the teacher in the CAN understand signs and simple notices.
classroom, such as ‘You must do this’, ‘Take off your coats’.
CAN continue a story or text that has been started in
CAN ask questions about school activities, for example English or add words that are missing.
classroom tasks, homework, holidays.
Flyers
Typical abilities Listening & Speaking Reading & Writing
Overall general ability CAN say that they do not understand something or cannot CAN understand longer texts about everyday topics, even
do something, and ask for help, using expressions such as if they do not know all the words.
‘Could you say it again, please?’.
CAN use a dictionary to help them understand a word
CAN talk about a problem in simple terms. they do not know.
Social & Leisure CAN arrange with friends to do something or play CAN write a short message on a postcard or in an email.
together.
CAN write about how they feel and give reasons why, in
CAN make and respond to invitations, suggestions, simple sentences.
apologies and requests.
School CAN understand audio and video clips used in the English CAN write short dialogues, for example in speech bubbles,
lesson. picture stories, comics.
CAN talk briefly about things they have done, for example CAN make up a story in English using ideas, pictures or
about their favourite holiday. words that the teacher gives them.
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 5

===== PAGE 8 =====
STARTERS | LISTENING
Starters
Listening
Approximately 20 minutes/20 items
There are four parts. Each part begins with one or two examples. All tasks are heard twice.
Part 1 Part 3
This is a test of five different lexical items – normally taken from This task consists of five questions, each a three-option multiple-
two or three semantic fields. The context is provided by a picture, choice with pictures. Candidates listen to the information conveyed in
within which the objects are ‘placed’ by the candidate, who has to five separate dialogues in which the speakers are clearly differentiated
draw a line from the named object to a location within the picture. by age or gender. Candidates listen and tick the correct picture.
The information is conveyed by a dialogue between male and female
Part 4
adult speakers.
This is a test of lexis, particularly names of colours, and prepositions
Part 2
of place. There is one large picture, and in it there are a number of
This is a simple note-taking exercise, in which candidates hear a examples of the same object. The candidate has to identify a certain
conversation between a child and an adult. There is one picture to object by listening to details of its position, and then colour it in
set the context, and a comprehension question for each item. Each correctly. The information is given in a dialogue between an adult and
answer is either a name or a number. The numbers dictated can be a child.
written as digits or words. All names are spelled out letter by letter,
and must be spelled correctly for the mark to be awarded.
Summary of Starters Listening test
Number of
Parts Main skill focus Input Expected response
questions
1 Listening for words and prepositions Picture and dialogue Carry out instructions and position 5
things correctly on a picture
2 Listening for numbers and spelling Illustrated comprehension questions Write numbers and names 5
and dialogue
3 Listening for specific information of 3-option multiple-choice pictures Tick correct box under picture 5
various kinds and dialogues
4 Listening for words, colours and Picture and dialogue Carry out instructions, locate 5
prepositions objects, and colour correctly
(Range of colours is: black, blue,
brown, green, grey, orange, pink,
purple, red, yellow)
6 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 9 =====
STARTERS | LISTENING
Recommendations for candidate preparation
Part 1
Practise with pictures to ensure that candidates can recognise all
of the nouns on the Starters vocabulary list. Reinforce candidates’
knowledge of any less familiar words with puzzles and vocabulary
games.
Encourage candidates to draw straight lines from each object to its
location – this will be much less confusing for them when they are
checking their work during the second hearing of the recording. Give
plenty of practice in understanding and using prepositional phrases
so that candidates realise they must listen carefully for prepositions
as well as nouns. In doing this, focus particularly on the prepositions
in the Starters vocabulary list and make sure that they are clear about
the difference between in and on, and on and under.
Part 2
Make sure that candidates know what is expected of them in this
task. They should appreciate that they only need to write a name
or a number in answer to each question. Anything candidates have to
write will be clearly heard twice.
Names which candidates are required to write will be spelled out
for them. All the names come from the Starters vocabulary list.
Candidates therefore need plenty of practice in the letters of the
alphabet, paying particular attention to the vowels and the ‘difficult’
consonants, such as G and J.
Where a number is required, candidates should be encouraged
to write numbers as digits rather than words to avoid spelling
mistakes. Candidates will only hear numbers 1–20 so they need plenty
of practice in hearing, and recognising, each of those numbers.
Part 3
Candidates are allowed time to look at the pictures before they hear
the dialogues. Encourage them to look carefully at the pictures and to
think about what they are illustrating.
Train candidates to listen to the whole of each dialogue as the answer
may well be provided in several parts of the dialogue rather than just
one turn.
Part 4
Ensure that candidates know they should bring coloured pencils to
the test.
Make sure candidates understand what is expected of them in this
part of the test. They have to identify which one of the seven similar
objects in the picture is being described and colour that object in the
right way.
Reassure them that this is an English test and not a test of their
colouring skills. They should focus on what they hear rather than
worrying about how well they are colouring.
Make sure that candidates are familiar with the names of the colours
that they are expected to know at this level.
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 7

===== PAGE 10 =====
8 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 11 =====
STARTERS | READING & WRITING
Starters
Reading & Writing
20 minutes/25 items
There are five parts. Each part begins with one or two examples. Correct spelling is required in all parts of the Reading & Writing test.
Part 1 given as jumbled letters. The candidate must write the word for each
object. Dashes indicate the number of letters in the answer.
In this task the candidate reads sentences. There are five statements,
each accompanied by a picture, and the candidate has to place a tick Part 4
in a box if the statement matches the picture, and a cross if it does
Candidates read a text and look at the words with pictures in a box
not.
below the text. They then copy the correct words in each of the five
Part 2 gaps. All missing words are singular or plural nouns. There are two
extra words which candidates should not use.
Candidates look at a picture and five statements, some of which
correctly describe the picture and some which do not. Candidates Part 5
write ‘yes’ or ‘no’ as appropriate.
A story is told through three pictures, with five questions,
Part 3 each of which requires a one-word answer. The correct word may
be a noun, verb or number.
This is a test of knowledge of words and spelling. There are five
pictures of objects, each accompanied by the word for the object
Summary of Starters Reading & Writing test
Number of
Parts Main skill focus Input Expected response
questions
1 Reading short sentences and Words, pictures and sentences Tick or cross to show if sentence is 5
recognising words true or false
2 Reading sentences about a picture Picture and sentences Write ‘yes’/‘no’ 5
Writing one-word answers
3 Spelling of single words Pictures and sets of jumbled letters Write words 5
4 Reading a text Cloze text, words and pictures Choose and copy missing words 5
Copying words
5 Reading questions about a picture Story presented through three Write one-word answers to 5
story pictures and questions questions
Writing one-word answers
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 9

===== PAGE 12 =====
STARTERS | READING & WRITING
Recommendations for candidate preparation Remind candidates that they must only use the letters provided when
doing this part. Practise doing anagrams.
General comment
Part 4
Many marks are lost because letters and/or words are not clearly
Candidates should be encouraged to read holistically for a sense
written. Remind candidates to check that what they have written is
of the text before trying to answer questions.
clear enough to be read by someone who is not familiar with their
handwriting. It is often better not to use joined-up writing, Practice in guessing which word could go into each gap would be
as letters can become confused and unclear. extremely useful. Candidates can then confirm their guesses by
seeing, and choosing from, the options underneath the text.
Candidates should be reminded to write only as much as they need
to, as marks are often lost attempting unnecessarily long answers Remind candidates that each answer is only one word, and must
which provide more opportunities for making mistakes. make sense in the story. It must also fit grammatically. Therefore,
give candidates plenty of practice matching pictures and words and
Because young candidates are unlikely to have had much experience
mixing up plurals and singulars to encourage them to be alert to these
managing their time in an examination, it can be helpful when
distinctions. Also, help them to identify words or grammatical forms
doing classroom tasks to give them a time limit both to improve
that will indicate whether an answer should be plural or not, e.g. if a
concentration and prevent them being distracted by other things.
gap is preceded by a.
Make sure candidates are familiar with the vocabulary, grammar and
structures in the Starters syllabus. Part 5
Part 1 Train candidates to learn the correct spelling of Starters words.
Do exercises which encourage careful reading.
Encourage candidates to read the sentences and look at the pictures
very carefully (at least twice), and make sure they know that the Key question words like Where and When are often misinterpreted or
mark they put in the box must be an unambiguous tick or a cross – if confused in Part 5, so do exercises which encourage quick, accurate
it looks as if it could be either, they will lose the mark. reading so that key question words are correctly identified and
understood.
When introducing new words to candidates, make sure they can
distinguish between related words that are commonly confused (e.g. Candidates should practise answering questions with single words,
sock/shoe). with the emphasis on selecting key information.
Give candidates practice in marking sentences with ticks or crosses
to indicate whether they are true or false.
Part 2
Give candidates plenty of practice in matching sentences to pictures.
Ask them to read texts which describe scenes and to draw the picture
according to the information in the text.
Do plenty of exercises comparing and contrasting different structures
and vocabulary related to pictures, for example, prepositions such
as in and on, the present continuous tense, different sports, etc.
Concentrate on words which are likely to be confused, e.g. photo/
camera, or which have ‘false friends’ in the candidates’ first language.
Make sure that candidates are very familiar with action verbs that
they are likely to come across in this section (run, ride, walk, play,
throw, sing, etc.).
Make sure they realise that if any element of the sentence is false,
then they must write no, even if there is an element which is true, for
example, The woman is throwing the ball to the girl. The woman must
be both throwing the ball and throwing it to the girl for a yes answer.
Part 3
Candidates should have practice in writing all the words in the
Starters vocabulary list.
For this part, give candidates plenty of spelling exercises, using
words from the list. Write difficult or less common words up on the
classroom walls so that candidates become very familiar with them.
Reinforce candidates’ knowledge of common letter patterns in English
– ea, ck, ight, ou, er, etc.
10 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 13 =====
STARTERS | SPEAKING
Starters
Speaking
3–5 minutes/5 parts
The Speaking test is a face-to-face test with one examiner and one candidate. It lasts approximately 4 minutes. The examiner’s language is scripted
to ensure fairness to all candidates. The script gives examiners scope to offer help and encouragement.
Each child is taken into the test by an usher. This is someone who speaks the candidate’s first language and may be known to the child. The usher
explains the test format in the child’s first language, before taking the child into the exam room and introducing them to the examiner.
The mark for the Speaking test is based on ratings for interactive listening ability, production of words and phrases, and pronunciation.
Part 1 Part 3
The examiner greets the candidate and checks the candidate’s name. The examiner asks the candidate some questions about the scene
This part is unassessed. picture.
The examiner starts the test by demonstrating what is required and Part 4
then asks the child to point to objects on the scene picture.
The examiner asks the candidate questions about three of the object
Part 2 cards.
The examiner asks the candidate to point to three object cards and Part 5
gives instructions to place them in different locations on the scene
The examiner asks the candidate some personal questions on topics
picture.
such as age, family, school and friends.
Summary of Starters Speaking test
Parts Main skill focus Input Expected response
1 Understanding and following spoken Scene picture Point to correct part of the picture
instructions
2 Understanding and following spoken Scene picture and eight small object cards Place object cards on the scene picture as
instructions directed
3 Understanding and answering spoken Scene picture Answer questions with short answers
questions
4 Understanding and answering spoken Three object cards Answer questions with short answers
questions
5 Understanding and responding to No visual prompt Answer questions with short answers
personal questions
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 11

===== PAGE 14 =====
STARTERS | SPEAKING
Recommendations for candidate preparation Starters topics
General comment (cid:698)(cid:886) animals
(cid:698)(cid:886) the body and the face
Candidates in the Starters Speaking test are required to follow simple (cid:698)(cid:886) clothes
instructions, answer simple questions about a picture and about (cid:698)(cid:886) colours
themselves. These are standard tasks in most English classes for (cid:698)(cid:886) family and friends
young learners. Cambridge Young Learners English Tests Sample Papers (cid:698)(cid:886) food and drink
give examples of the kind of pictures, instructions and questions (cid:698)(cid:886) the home
candidates will be asked to respond to. (cid:698)(cid:886) numbers 1–20
(cid:698)(cid:886) places and directions
Part 1
(cid:698)(cid:886) school
Candidates should practise identifying people, animals and things in (cid:698)(cid:886) sports and leisure
different pictures by pointing in response to questions such as: (cid:698)(cid:886) time
(cid:698)(cid:886) toys
Where’s the snake?
(cid:698)(cid:886) transport
Where are the fish?
(cid:698)(cid:886) weather
Part 2 (cid:698)(cid:886) work
(cid:698)(cid:886) the world around us
Candidates should also practise placing smaller pictures in different
positions on a larger picture in response to instructions such as:
Put the bike under the tree.
Put the cake in the boat.
Candidates should not worry if the required position (of, for example,
the cake) does not seem to be a very appropriate one!
Part 3
Candidates should also practise answering simple questions about a
picture (with one-word answers). For example:
What’s this? (elephant)
What colour is it? (grey)
How many elephants are there? (two)
What’s the boy doing? (drinking)
Parts 4 and 5
In Parts 4 and 5, candidates need to feel confident that they can give
basic information about themselves and can answer questions such
as:
How old are you?
What’s your friend’s name?
Is your house/flat/apartment big or small?
Can you play table tennis?
What’s your favourite colour/animal/sport/food?
Use English to give everyday classroom instructions so that children
become very familiar with instructions like Look at … ,
Listen to … , Give … , Put … , Find … .
Candidates create a good impression when they can handle greetings
and other social formulae confidently. Make sure they are happy
using Hello, Goodbye and Thank you, and that they have plenty
of practice at using Sorry, or I don’t understand whenever this is
appropriate.
12 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 15 =====
STARTERS | GRAMMAR & STRUCTURES LIST
Starters
grammar and structures list
See vocabulary lists for a comprehensive list of words in each category
Examples
Nouns Would you like an orange?
Lemons are yellow.
Singular and plural including irregular plural forms, countable and
uncountable and names Pat has six mice.
I eat rice for lunch.
Anna is my friend.
Adjectives He’s a small boy.
His name is Bill.
Including possessive adjectives
Determiners It’s a banana.
This is an apple.
Put the hat on the boy’s head.
I want some milk.
These books are blue.
Pronouns This is my car.
Can you see me?
Including demonstrative, personal, and possessive interrogative
pronouns and ‘one’ Which is Anna?
Yes, please. I’d like one.
This is mine!
Is that yours?
Verbs
(Positive, negative, question, imperative and short answer forms,
including contractions)
Present simple Nick is happy.
I don’t like eggs.
Eat your lunch!
Is that your sister? Yes, it is.
Present continuous (not with future reference) What are you doing?
The cat’s sleeping.
Can for ability The baby can wave.
Can for requests/permission Can I have some birthday cake?
Have (got) for possession Have you got a pen?
She hasn’t got a dog.
Adverbs I’m colouring it now.
My grandma lives here.
She lives here too.
Conjunctions I’ve got a pen and a pencil.
Prepositions of place and time Put the clock next to the picture.
We go to school in the morning.
Question words Who is that man?
Where is Alex?
Impersonal you How do you spell that?
Have + obj + inf Lucy has a book to read.
ing forms as nouns Swimming is good.
Let’s Let’s go to the zoo!
Like + v + ing I like swimming.
There is/there are There is a monkey in the tree.
There are some books on the table.
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 13

===== PAGE 16 =====
STARTERS | GRAMMAR & STRUCTURES LIST
Examples
Would like + n or v I would like some grapes.
Would you like to colour that ball?
Happy Birthday You’re eight today! Happy Birthday!
Here you are Would you like an apple?
Yes, please.
Here you are.
Me too I like football.
Me too.
So do I I love hippos.
So do I.
story about + ing This is a story about playing football.
What (a/an) + adj + n What a good dog!
What beautiful fish!
What now? Put the egg in the box.
OK! The egg is in the box. What now?
14 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 17 =====
STARTERS | ALPHABETIC VOCABULARY LIST
Starters
Grammatical Key
alphabetic vocabulary list adj adjective int interrogative
adv adverb n noun
conj conjunction poss possessive
det determiner prep preposition
dis discourse marker pron pronoun
excl exclamation v verb
A
a det alien n Ann n armchair n
about prep alphabet n Anna n ask v
add v an det answer n + v at prep of place
afternoon n and conj apartment n (UK flat)
again adv angry adj apple n
Alex n animal n arm n
B
baby n beach n bird n box n
badminton n bean n birthday n boy n
bag n beautiful adj black adj bread n
ball n bed n blue adj breakfast n
balloon n bedroom n board n brother n
banana n behind prep boat n brown adj
baseball n Ben n body n burger n
basketball n between prep book n bus n
bath n big adj bookcase n but conj
bathroom n bike n bookshop n bye (-bye) excl
be v Bill n bounce v
C
cake n chair n clean adj + v complete v
camera n chicken n clock n computer n
can v child/children n close v correct adj
candy n (UK sweet(s)) chips n (US fries) closed adj cousin n
car n chocolate n clothes n cow n
carrot n choose v coconut n crocodile n
cat n class n colour n + v cross n + v
catch (e.g. a ball) v classroom n come v cupboard n
D
dad(dy) n dinner n don’t worry excl dress n
Dan n dirty adj door n drink n + v
day n do v double adj drive v
desk n dog n draw v duck n
dining room n doll n drawing n
E
ear n elephant n enjoy v example n
eat v end n eraser n (UK rubber) eye n
egg n English adj + n evening n
F
face n fishing n foot/feet n from prep
family n flat n (US apartment) football n (US soccer) fruit n
father n floor n for prep funny adj
favourite adj flower n friend n
find v fly v fries n (UK chips)
fish (s + pl) n food n frog n
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 15

===== PAGE 18 =====
STARTERS | ALPHABETIC VOCABULARY LIST
G
game n glasses n grandfather n great adj + excl
garden n go v grandma n green adj
get v goat n grandmother n grey adj (US gray)
giraffe n good adj grandpa n guitar n
girl n goodbye excl grape n
give v Grace n gray adj (UK grey)
H
hair n have got v hers pron hold v
hall n he pron him pron home n + adv
hand n head n hippo n horse n
handbag n helicopter n his poss adj + pron house n
happy adj hello excl hit v how int
hat n her poss adj + pron hobby n how many int
have v here adv hockey n how old int
I
I pron in prep of place + time it pron
ice cream n in front of prep its poss adj + pron
J
jacket n Jill n jump v
jeans n juice n
K
keyboard n (computer) Kim n kite n
kick v kitchen n know v
L
lamp n letter n (as in alphabet) lizard n lots adv + pron
learn v like prep + v long adj lots of det
leg n lime n look v love v
lemon n line n look at v Lucy n
lemonade n listen v lorry n (US truck) lunch n
lesson n live v a lot adv + pron
let’s v living room n a lot of det
M
make v me too dis monster n Mr title
man/men n meat n morning n Mrs title
mango n milk n mother n mum(my) n
many det mine pron motorbike n music n
mat n mirror n mouse/mice n my poss adj
May (as in girl’s name) n Miss title mouse n (computer)
me pron monkey n mouth n
N
name n nice adj no adv + det now adv
new adj Nick n nose n number n
next to prep night n not adv
O
of prep old adj open adj + v ours pron
oh dis on prep of place or conj
oh dear excl one det + pron orange adj + n
OK adj + dis onion n our poss adj
16 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 19 =====
STARTERS | ALPHABETIC VOCABULARY LIST
P
page n pea n piano n playground n
paint n + v pear n pick up v please dis
painting n pen n picture n point v
pardon int pencil n pineapple n potato n
park n person/people n pink adj purple adj
part n phone n + v plane n put v
Pat n photo n play v
Q
question n
R
radio n rice n robot n run v
read v ride v room n
really adv right adj (as in correct) rubber n (US eraser)
red adj right dis ruler n
S
sad adj shell n smile n + v stand v
Sam n shirt n snake n start v
sand n shoe n so dis stop v
sausage n shop n (US store) soccer n (UK football) store n (UK shop)
say v short adj sock n story n
school n show v sofa n street n
sea n sing v some det Sue n
see v sister n song n sun n
See you! excl sit v sorry adj + int supper n
sentence n skirt n spell v sweet(s) n (US candy)
she pron sleep v spider n swim v
sheep (s + pl) n small adj sport n
T
table n thank you dis they pron Tony n
table tennis n thanks dis this det + pron too adv
tail n that det + pron those det + pron toy n
take a photo/picture v the det throw v train n
talk v their poss adj tick n + v tree n
teacher n theirs pron tiger n trousers n
television/TV n them pron to prep truck n (UK lorry)
tell v then dis today adv + n try n + v
tennis n there adv Tom n T-shirt n
test n + v these det + pron tomato n TV/television n
U
ugly adj under prep understand v us pron
V
very adv
W
walk v wave v where int with prep
wall n we pron which int woman/women n
want v wear v white adj word n
watch n + v well dis who int would like v
water n well done dis whose int wow! excl
watermelon n what int window n write v
X
(No words at this level)
Y
year n yes adv young adj yours pron
yellow adj you pron your poss adj
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 17

===== PAGE 20 =====
STARTERS | ALPHABETIC VOCABULARY LIST
Z
zoo n
Letters & Numbers
Candidates will be expected to understand and write the letters of the alphabet and numbers 1–20.
Names
Candidates will be expected to recognise and write the following names:
Alex Dan May Tom
Ann Grace Nick Tony
Anna Jill Pat
Ben Kim Sam
Bill Lucy Sue
18 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 21 =====
MOVERS | LISTENING
Movers
Listening
Approximately 25 minutes/25 items
There are five parts. Each part begins with one example. All tasks are heard twice.
Part 1 Part 3
In this task, candidates look at a picture which shows people doing In this task candidates listen to a dialogue in which a child describes
different things. Above and below are people’s names. Candidates to an adult what he/she did during the past week. Candidates listen
listen to a dialogue between an adult and a child and draw lines from and draw lines from the days of the week to the correct pictures.
the names to the correct person in the picture.
Part 4
Part 2
This task consists of five questions, each a 3-option multiple-choice
This is a note-taking exercise in which candidates listen to a with pictures. Candidates listen to five dialogues in which the
conversation between two speakers and write a word or a number speakers are clearly differentiated by age or gender. Candidates listen
next to five short prompts on a form or page of a notepad. Some and tick the correct picture.
misspellings will be allowed for words which are not spelled out on
Part 5
the recording.
This task consists of a dialogue in which an adult asks a child
to colour different things in a picture, and write a simple word or
draw an object. Candidates listen to the dialogue and follow the
instructions.
Summary of Movers Listening test
Number of
Parts Main skill focus Input Expected response
questions
1 Listening for names and descriptions Picture, names and dialogue Draw lines to match names to 5
people in a picture
2 Listening for names, spellings and Form or page of notepad with Write words or numbers in gaps 5
other information missing words and dialogue
3 Listening for specific information Pictures, days of the week and Draw lines from days of week to 5
(past tense) dialogue correct pictures
4 Listening for specific information of 3-option multiple-choice pictures Tick boxes under correct pictures 5
various kinds and dialogues
5 Listening for words, colours and Picture and dialogue Carry out instructions to colour and 5
specific information draw or write
(Range of colours is: black, blue,
brown, green, grey, orange, pink,
purple, red, yellow)
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 19

===== PAGE 22 =====
MOVERS | LISTENING
Recommendations for candidate preparation
Part 1
Ensure that candidates realise that there is one extra name at the
top of the page which will not be mentioned. They should not aim to
connect all seven names to a person in the picture.
Make sure that candidates know which first names on the vocabulary
lists are male and which are female. Note that Alex, Kim, Pat and Sam
may be used to refer either to a boy or to a girl.
Train candidates to listen for all the information that they are given
about a particular person. They should not jump to conclusions after
hearing one piece of information, as usually some further information
will be required in order to identify the correct person.
Part 2
Candidates often find this part of the Movers Listening test difficult.
Practise by doing similar productive tasks in the classroom.
Encourage candidates to be as accurate as possible in their spelling of
the words on the Starters and Movers vocabulary lists.
Ensure that candidates realise that they have to write responses
which make sense, given the prompts on the question paper.
They should look at these prompts carefully and think about
what they mean before listening to the recording.
Part 3
Train candidates to draw a line to the appropriate picture in the most
direct way possible, rather than across two or three other pictures
which may well lead to confusion. Make sure candidates realise they
will be expected to use any one day of the week once only, and that
one day of the week will not be used at all.
Encourage candidates not to leave any questions unanswered. When
they have used all the days that they are sure about, they should try
to make an intelligent guess as to which days the remaining pictures
represent.
Part 4
Make sure that candidates realise that they must listen to the whole
dialogue, before deciding on their answer.
Often quite a wide range of vocabulary is covered in this part of the
test. Candidates must be familiar with all the words in the Starters and
Movers vocabulary lists, in order to be sure of achieving full marks.
Part 5
Ensure that candidates appreciate that they will either have to
draw or write something for one of the questions in this part of the
Movers test. If they have to write something, it will not be a difficult
word and there will probably be something in the picture that makes
it a logical word to write.
Train candidates to listen carefully for prepositional phrases which
describe exactly where something is (e.g. the bag behind the chair or
the towel on the floor under the desk).
20 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 23 =====
MOVERS | READING & WRITING
Movers
Reading & Writing
30 minutes/40 items
There are six parts. Each part begins with one or two examples. Correct spelling is required in all parts of the Reading & Writing test.
Part 1 Part 4
In this task, candidates match words and definitions. There are eight Candidates read a text and look at the words and pictures in a box
pictures, each with the words that they illustrate written under them, next to the text. They then copy the correct words in each of the
and six definitions. Candidates copy the correct words next to the six gaps. The missing words are nouns, adjectives or verbs (present
definitions. and past tense). There are two extra words which candidates should
not use.
Part 2
Candidates choose the best title for the story from a choice of three.
Candidates look at a picture and six statements, some of which
correctly describe the picture and some which do not. Candidates Part 5
write ‘yes’ or ‘no’ as appropriate.
Candidates read a story and complete sentences using one, two or
three words. The story is divided into three sections, each with an
Part 3
illustration. The pictures do not provide answers to the questions.
In this task, candidates read a short written dialogue, for which three
different responses are given for what the second speaker says in his/ Part 6
her turn. Candidates choose the correct response by circling letters.
In this task, candidates read a factual text which contains five gaps.
They choose the correct word from a choice of three and copy the
correct words in the gaps. This task has a grammatical focus.
Summary of Movers Reading & Writing test
Number of
Parts Main skill focus Input Expected response
questions
1 Reading short definitions and Labelled pictures and definitions Copy correct words next to 6
matching to words definitions
Writing words
2 Reading sentences about a picture Picture and sentences Write ‘yes’/’no’ 6
Writing one-word answers
3 Reading a dialogue Short dialogue with multiple-choice Choose correct response by circling 6
Choosing the correct responses responses a letter
4 Reading for specific information and Cloze text, words and pictures Choose and copy missing words 7
gist correctly. Tick a box to choose the
Copying words best title for the story
5 Reading a story Story, pictures and gapped Complete sentences about story by 10
Completing sentences sentences writing one, two or three words
6 Reading and understanding a factual Gapped text and 3-option multiple- Complete text by selecting the 5
text choice (grammatical words) correct words and copying them in
Copying words the corresponding gaps
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 21

===== PAGE 24 =====
MOVERS | READING & WRITING
Recommendations for candidate preparation Part 4
Candidates should be encouraged to read the whole text to get
General comment
a general idea of what it is about before trying to complete the first
Many marks are lost because letters and/or words are not clearly gap. Make sure candidates realise that they need to read the text
written. Remind candidates to check what they have written is surrounding the question to be able to correctly fill the gap. Practice
clear enough to be read by someone who is not familiar with their in guessing which word could go into each gap would be extremely
handwriting. It is often better not to use joined-up writing, as letters useful. Candidates can then confirm their guesses by seeing, and
can become confused and unclear. choosing from, the options on the facing page.
Candidates should be reminded to write only as much as they need Also, practise choosing the right form of words (plural/singular
to, as marks are often lost attempting unnecessarily long answers nouns, adjectives, verbs) within sentences and texts. Help candidates
which provide more opportunity for making mistakes. to identify words or structures that will indicate what form of word
the answer should be.
Because young candidates are unlikely to have had much experience
managing their time in exams, it can be helpful when doing classroom
Part 5
tasks to give a time limit, both to improve concentration and prevent
candidates being distracted by other things. Remind candidates that the pictures are there to support the story,
although they do not provide the answers to the questions. Useful
Make sure candidates are familiar with the structures and vocabulary
practice can be gained from predicting an outline of the story from
in the Starters and Movers syllabuses.
the three pictures and the title. However, it must be remembered that
the answers should always be found in the texts. Practice in reading
Part 1
for gist is useful, as are tasks aimed at understanding whole texts, for
Give candidates practice in reading and writing definitions of items example, selecting titles for paragraphs or complete stories.
from the Movers vocabulary list. Ensure candidates are familiar with
Give candidates practice in finding synonyms/alternatives for nouns,
the structures and vocabulary commonly used in defining things,
identifying what is being referred to in a text, how nouns can be
such as you with general reference (e.g. You can find books or do your
replaced with pronouns, and how sentences can be turned around
homework in this place), relative pronouns and infinitives used to
whilst retaining their meaning (e.g. On Friday the family ate breakfast in
express purpose.
the garden can become The family had breakfast in the garden on Friday).
Candidates should practise accurate copying, but remind them to Candidates are not expected to produce vocabulary or grammatical
copy the whole option and not to add anything extra. This means structures that are not in the text, but must ensure that the words
including the article if there is one, and not adding one if it is not they choose to complete the sentence frames are grammatically
needed. Once they have written the answer, they should check correct.
that they have spelled the word correctly.
Part 6
Part 2
As with Part 4 above, candidates should practise choosing and
Give candidates plenty of practice matching pictures and sentences, forming the correct type of word (nouns, adjectives, verbs) to fit into
drawing their attention to elements such as prepositions and verb sentences and texts.
forms (especially the present continuous tense) and using pictures
Remind candidates that they must choose from the three options
which make these distinctions clear.
given. It is not necessary for them to think of a word to fit each space.
Give more pictures than sentences, so that they really have to think Remind candidates to be careful to check that they have chosen a
about the distinction between, for example, is riding a bike and word from the correct set of options.
has got a bike.
As in Part 5, practise reading skills such as understanding how
Remind candidates that the sentence must be completely true pronouns can refer back to names or items.
according to the picture for a yes answer, for example, The floor
is wet and there’s a toothbrush on it.
Part 3
Remind candidates to read all the options before choosing the best
and most appropriate one. Practise appropriate responses, not just to
questions, but also to statements.
Give plenty of practice with the use of set (formulaic) expressions
and with short Yes/No answers.
Give plenty of practice, too, with multiple-choice questions to
encourage candidates to understand the differences between the
options in meaning, grammar, sense and appropriacy.
22 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 25 =====
MOVERS | SPEAKING
Movers
Speaking
5–7 minutes/4 parts
The Speaking test is a face-to-face test with one candidate and one examiner. It lasts approximately 6 minutes. The examiner’s language is scripted to
ensure fairness to all candidates. The script gives examiners scope to offer help and encouragement.
Each child is taken into the test by an usher. This is someone who speaks the candidate’s first language and may be known to the child. The usher
explains the test format in the child’s first language, before taking the child into the exam room and introducing them to the examiner.
The mark for the Speaking test is based on ratings for interactive listening ability, production of appropriate and extended responses, and
pronunciation.
Part 1 and describes the first picture in the story. He/she then asks the
candidate to describe the other three pictures.
The examiner greets the candidate and checks the candidate’s name.
This part is unassessed. Part 3
The examiner starts the test by demonstrating what is required and The examiner shows the candidate four sets of four pictures where
by showing the candidate two pictures which look similar, but have one picture in each set is the ‘odd one out’. The candidate has to
some differences. The examiner then asks the candidate to describe identify which picture is the odd one out in the remaining three sets
four differences. and say why.
Part 2 Part 4
The examiner shows the candidate a sequence of four pictures which The examiner asks the candidate some personal questions on topics
show a story. The examiner tells the candidate the name of the story such as school, weekends, friends and hobbies.
Summary of Movers Speaking test
Parts Main skill focus Input Expected response
1 Describing two pictures by using short Two similar pictures Identify four differences between pictures
responses
2 Understanding the beginning of a story Picture sequence Describe each picture in turn
and then continuing it based on a series
of pictures
3 Suggesting a picture which is different Picture sets Identify odd one out and give reason
and explaining why
4 Understanding and responding to Open-ended questions Answer personal questions
personal questions about candidate
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 23

===== PAGE 26 =====
MOVERS | SPEAKING
Recommendations for candidate preparation For example:
These are fruit, this isn’t.
General comment
These children are sitting, but these children are dancing.
Candidates in the Movers Speaking test are required to follow These are animals and this isn’t.
instructions and talk in a very simple way about different pictures, This is on a bed, but these are under it.
and to answer simple questions about themselves. These are
There may be many different ways of expressing the same difference.
standard tasks in most English classes for young learners. Cambridge
Candidates may also find an alternative difference to the one
Young Learners English Tests Sample Papers give examples of the kind
intended. This is perfectly acceptable provided they give a reason for
of pictures, instructions and questions candidates will be asked to
their choice.
respond to.
Part 4
Part 1
Finally, for Part 4, make sure candidates feel confident answering
For Part 1, candidates should practise describing differences between
questions about themselves, their families and friends, their homes,
two similar pictures. The differences may be related to colour, size,
their school and free time activities, their likes and dislikes. They
number, position, appearance, activity, etc.
should be able to answer questions such as:
For example:
Who do you play with at school?
This coat is red, but this one’s yellow. What games do you play at school?
Here there’s a bird, but here there’s a cat. What do you have for lunch?
Here the boy’s eating a burger, but here he’s eating chips.
Only simple answers of between one to four words are expected.
It’s cloudy in this picture, but it’s sunny in this one.
Questions will normally be in the present tense, but candidates
Although the above represent examples of ideal responses, should also be prepared to use the past tense and answer questions
something much simpler is perfectly acceptable. For example, about, for example, what they did last weekend.
Here red and here yellow, etc.
Use English to give everyday classroom instructions so that
Part 2 candidates become very familiar with the English of classroom
exercises and activities.
Part 2 in the Movers Speaking test requires candidates to tell a simple
Candidates create a good impression when they can handle greetings
story based on four pictures. Candidates will benefit from practice in
and other social formulae confidently. Make sure they are happy
telling simple picture stories. Note that examiners are not looking for
using Hello, Goodbye and Thank you. Encourage them to use Sorry or I
evidence of storytelling skills. Candidates are only expected to say
don’t understand when this is appropriate.
a few words about each picture in the sequence without necessarily
developing these comments into a narrative.
Movers topics
Before asking candidates to tell the story, the examiner says, ‘Look at
the pictures first.’ Advise candidates to look at each picture in turn to
(cid:698)(cid:886) animals
get a general idea of the story before they start to speak. However,
(cid:698)(cid:886) the body and the face
they should not worry if they cannot follow the narrative of the
(cid:698)(cid:886) clothes
picture story. It is perfectly acceptable just to say a few words about
(cid:698)(cid:886) colours
each picture in the sequence without developing these comments
(cid:698)(cid:886) family and friends
into a story. The examiner will prompt by asking a question if a
(cid:698)(cid:886) food and drink
candidate needs help.
(cid:698)(cid:886) health
The structures candidates will need most frequently in this task are (cid:698)(cid:886) the home
There is/are, the present tense of the verbs be and have (got), the (cid:698)(cid:886) numbers 1–100
modals can/can’t and must/mustn’t and the present continuous tense (cid:698)(cid:886) places and directions
of some action verbs (for example, play, read, look at, write, laugh, go). (cid:698)(cid:886) school
They should be able to say things like The woman’s talking, The boy’s in (cid:698)(cid:886) sports and leisure
the park. Candidates should also be able to describe simple feelings, (cid:698)(cid:886) time
for example, The boy is/isn’t happy. The examiner will prompt by (cid:698)(cid:886) toys
asking a question if a candidate needs help. (cid:698)(cid:886) transport
(cid:698)(cid:886) weather
Part 3 (cid:698)(cid:886) work
(cid:698)(cid:886) the world around us
For Part 3, candidates should practise identifying the different one in
a set of four pictures – for example, a picture of a book among three
pictures of different fruits, a picture of some children sitting among
three pictures of children dancing, a picture of a sweater among three
pictures of animals and a picture of something on a bed among three
pictures of something under a bed. Candidates are only expected
to give simple reasons for choosing a picture as the different one.
24 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 27 =====
MOVERS | GRAMMAR & STRUCTURES LIST
Movers
grammar and structures list
The list below details what is new at Movers level. Movers candidates will be expected to know everything on this list in addition to the list at
Starters level. See vocabulary lists for a comprehensive list of words in each category.
Examples
Indirect objects Give it to the teacher!
Comparative and superlative adjectives Your house is bigger than mine.
Anna is my best friend.
Verbs
(Positive, negative, question, imperative and short answer forms,
including contractions)
Past simple regular and irregular forms We went to the park yesterday.
Her father cooked lunch on Friday.
Did you go to the cinema? Yes, I did.
We didn’t see the pirate at the party.
Verb + infinitive I want to go home.
He started to laugh.
Verb + ing I went riding on Saturday.
Infinitive of purpose She went to town to buy a toothbrush.
Want/ask someone to do something He wants the teacher to tell a story.
Must for obligation He must do his homework.
You mustn’t give the rabbit cheese.
Must I get up now?
Have (got) to/had to I’ve got to go.
Do I have to go to bed now?
He had to draw a whale for homework.
Shall for offers Shall I help you wash the car, Mum?
Could (past form of can) I could see some birds in the tree.
Adverbs She never eats meat.
He sang loudly.
My mother talks a lot.
Comparative and superlative adverbs My brother reads more quickly than my sister.
I like ice cream best.
Conjunctions I went home because I was tired.
Prepositions of time She plays with her friends after school.
He plays badminton on Saturdays.
Question words Why is he talking to her?
When does school start?
Relative clauses Vicky is the girl who is riding a bike.
That is the DVD which my friend gave me.
This is the house where my friend lives.
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 25

===== PAGE 28 =====
MOVERS | GRAMMAR & STRUCTURES LIST
Examples
What is/was the weather like? What was the weather like last weekend?
What’s the matter? What’s the matter, Daisy? Have you got a stomach-ache?
How/what about + n or ing How about going to the cinema on Wednesday afternoon?
When clauses (not with future meaning) When he got home, he had his dinner.
Go for a + n Yesterday we went for a drive in my brother’s new car.
Be called + n A baby cat is called a kitten.
Be good at + n She’s very good at basketball.
I think/know … I think he’s very nice.
26 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 29 =====
MOVERS | ALPHABETIC VOCABULARY LIST
Movers
Grammatical Key
alphabetic vocabulary list adj adjective int interrogative
adv adverb n noun
conj conjunction poss possessive
The following words appear for the first time at Movers level. det determiner prep preposition
dis discourse marker pron pronoun
excl exclamation v verb
A
above prep age n another det + pron awake adj
address n all adj +adv + det + pron any det + pron
afraid adj all right adj + adv at prep of time
after prep always adv aunt n
B
back adj + adv + n be called v blanket n bring v
bad adj bear n blond(e) adj bus station n
badly adv beard n boring adj bus stop n
balcony n because conj both det + pron busy adj
band (music) n before prep bottle n buy v
bank n below prep bottom adj + n by prep
basement n best adj + adv bowl n
bat n better adj + adv break n
C
café n change v cloudy adj could v (as in past of can
cage n Charlie n clown n for ability)
call v cheese n coat n country n
careful adj cinema n coffee n countryside n
carefully adv circle n cold adj + n cry v
carry v city n come on! excl cup n
catch v (e.g. a bus) city/town centre n comic n curly adj
CD n clever adj comic book n
CD player n climb v cook v
centre n cloud n cough n
D
Daisy n difficult adj dream n + v dry adj + v
dance v doctor n dress up v DVD n
daughter n dolphin n drive n DVD player n
difference n down adv + prep driver n
different adj downstairs adv + n drop v
E
earache n email n + v everything pron
easy adj every det exciting adj
elevator n (UK lift) everyone pron excuse me dis
F
fair adj farmer n first adj + adv Fred n
fall v fat adj fish v Friday n
famous adj field n floor n (e.g. ground, 1st, etc.) frightened adj
fan n film n + v (US movie) fly n
farm n fine adj + excl forest n
G
get dressed v glass n grandson n
get off v go shopping v grass n
get on v grandchild(ren) n ground n
get undressed v granddaughter n grown-up n
get up v grandparent n
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 27

===== PAGE 30 =====
MOVERS | ALPHABETIC VOCABULARY LIST
H
have (got) to v holiday n hot adj hundred n
headache n homework n how adv hungry adj
help v hop v how much adv + int hurt v
hide v hospital n how often adv + int
I
idea n internet n invite v
inside adv + n + prep into prep island n
J
Jack n Jim n jungle n
Jane n John n
K
kangaroo n kick n kind n kitten n
L
lake n leaf/leaves n Lily n lose v
last adj + adv library n lion n loud adj
laugh n + v lift n (US elevator) look for v loudly adv
M
map n mean v moon n moustache n
market n message n more adv + det + pron move v
Mary n mistake n most adv + det + pron movie n (UK film)
matter n Monday n mountain n must v
N
naughty adj neck n never adv nothing pron
near adv + prep need v noise n nurse n
O
off adv + prep on adv + prep of time opposite prep out of prep
often adv only adv out adv outside adv + n + prep
P
pair n pasta n pirate n present n
panda n Paul n place n pretty adj
parent n pet n plant n + v puppy n
parrot n Peter n plate n put on v
party n picnic n pool n
Q
quick adj quickly adv quiet adj quietly adv
R
rabbit n ride n rock n
rain n + v river n roof n
rainbow n road n round adj + adv + prep
S
safe adj shopping centre n soup n surprised adj
sail n + v shoulder n sports centre n sweater n
salad n shout v square adj + n sweet adj
Sally n shower n stair(s) n swim n
sandwich n skate n + v star n swimming pool n
Saturday n skip v station n
scarf n slow adj stomach n
seat n slowly adv stomach-ache n
second adj + adv snow n + v straight adj
shall v someone pron strong adj
shark n something pron Sunday n
shop v sometimes adv sunny adj
shopping n son n supermarket n
28 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 31 =====
MOVERS | ALPHABETIC VOCABULARY LIST
T
take v than conj + prep ticket n town/city centre n
take off v (i.e. get then adv tired adj travel v
undressed) thin adj tooth/teeth n treasure n
tall adj thing n toothache n trip n
tea n think v toothbrush n Tuesday n
temperature n third adj + adv top adj + n
terrible adj thirsty adj towel n
text n + v Thursday n town n
U
uncle n up adv + prep upstairs adv + n
V
vegetable n Vicky n video n + v village n
W
wait v website n when adv + conj + int world n
wake (up) v Wednesday n which pron worse adj + adv
walk n week n who pron worst adj + adv
wash n + v weekend n why int would v
waterfall n well adj + adv wind n wrong adj
weak adj wet adj windy adj
weather n whale n work n + v
X
(No words at this level)
Y
yesterday adv + n
Z
(No words at this level)
Numbers
Candidates will be expected to understand and write numbers 21–100 and ordinals 1st–20th.
Names
Candidates will be expected to recognise and write the following names:
Charlie Jane Mary Vicky
Daisy Jim Paul
Fred John Peter
Jack Lily Sally
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 29

===== PAGE 32 =====
MOVERS | ALPHABETIC VOCABULARY LIST
30 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 33 =====
FLYERS | LISTENING
Flyers
Listening
Approximately 25 minutes/25 items
There are five parts. Each part begins with one example. All tasks are heard twice.
Part 1 Part 3
In this task, candidates look at a picture which shows people doing Candidates listen to a conversation which is mainly led by one
different things. Above and below are people’s names. Candidates speaker. They match a list of illustrated words or names with a set of
listen to a dialogue between an adult and a child and draw lines from pictures by writing the letter of the correct picture in a box.
the names to the correct person in the picture.
Part 4
Part 2
This task consists of five questions, each a 3-option multiple-choice
This is a note-taking exercise in which candidates listen to a with pictures. Candidates listen to five separate dialogues
conversation between two speakers and write a word or a number in which the speakers are clearly differentiated by age or gender.
next to five short prompts on a form or page of a notepad. Some Candidates listen and tick the correct picture.
misspellings will be allowed for words which are not spelled out on
Part 5
the recording.
This task consists of a dialogue in which an adult asks a child to
colour different things in a picture, write a simple word and draw and
colour an object. Candidates listen to the dialogue and follow the
instructions.
Summary of Flyers Listening test
Number of
Parts Main skill focus Input Expected response
questions
1 Listening for names and descriptions Picture, names and dialogue Draw lines to match names to 5
people in a picture
2 Listening for names, spellings and Form or page of a notepad with Write words or numbers in gaps 5
other information missing words and dialogue
3 Listening for words, names and Picture sets and list of illustrated Match pictures with illustrated word 5
detailed information words or names and dialogue or name by writing letter in box
4 Listening for specific information of 3-option multiple-choice pictures Tick boxes under correct pictures 5
various kinds and dialogues
5 Listening for words, colours and Picture and dialogue Carry out instructions to colour, 5
specific information draw and write
(Range of colours is: black, blue,
brown, green, grey, orange, pink,
purple, red, yellow)
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 31

===== PAGE 34 =====
FLYERS | LISTENING
Recommendations for candidate preparation two people or things look different. Practice in handling these types
of language will therefore stand candidates in good stead for dealing
Part 1 with this part of the test.
Encourage candidates to spend the time they are given to look at the Candidates should be aware that this task is perhaps more
picture before the questions start by thinking about how each of the challenging than it appears and should ensure that they listen
characters might be described. They should be aware that they will to the instructions very carefully.
have to focus on language that points to the differences between two
similar people in the picture.
The language that candidates will need for this task is that which
is used not only for describing people’s clothes and physical
appearance but also for commenting on what they are doing. Practice
in describing a range of pictures and photos containing people is,
therefore, likely to help candidates do well in this part of the test.
Part 2
Give candidates as much practice as possible with this kind of
productive task, as candidates sometimes find this task difficult.
Make sure that candidates understand the meanings of, and are also
able to spell correctly, the words in the Starters, Movers and Flyers
vocabulary lists.
Even at Flyers level, candidates often seem uncertain about the names
of some letters of the alphabet in English. Clearly the more practice
that can be given here the better.
Part 3
Make sure candidates read the introductory question at the head
of the task, which sets the context, and gives the instructions. Both
should help them to understand what they are being asked to do.
Encourage candidates to listen carefully to the dialogue and
understand exactly what is said. They should remember that speakers
will talk about the two pictures which are not correct, as well as those
that are. Candidates should therefore not assume that the first word
they hear is the right answer.
Part 4
Part 4 covers a wide range of the grammar and vocabulary
appropriate to this level. Teachers should make sure that the
structures and vocabulary listed in the syllabus have been well
covered in class.
It is also very important that candidates listen to the whole of the
dialogue before choosing their answer. They should be aware that the
correct answer to each individual question may come at any point in
the dialogue and is not necessarily the last thing mentioned.
Part 5
As with all parts of this test, make sure that candidates know exactly
what is expected of them. In Part 5, for example, they are required
to write something and also to draw and colour one object. They will
not be expected to write or draw anything difficult. Nor will they be
expected to draw or colour particularly well. They simply have to
show that they have understood the instructions correctly.
For this task, candidates will need to show that they can understand
language which distinguishes between two similar but slightly
different objects or people. This may be a matter of understanding
language which explains precisely where someone or something is, or
it may be a matter of understanding language which focuses on how
32 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 35 =====
FLYERS | READING & WRITING
Flyers
Reading & Writing
40 minutes/50 items
There are seven parts. Each part begins with one or two examples. Correct spelling is required in all parts of the Reading & Writing test.
Part 1
and adverbs. Correct spelling is required. There are four extra words
In this task there are 15 words and 10 definitions. The words are not which candidates should not use.
illustrated. Candidates match words to the corresponding definition
Candidates choose the best title for the story from a choice of three.
by writing the correct words.
Part 5
Part 2
Candidates read a story and complete sentences using one, two,
Candidates look at a picture and seven statements, some of which
three or four words. There is one continuous text and one picture. The
correctly describe the picture and some which do not. Candidates
picture provides a context for the story but does not provide answers
write ‘yes’ or ‘no’ as appropriate.
to the questions.
Part 3
Part 6
Candidates read a dialogue in which the second speaker’s responses
In this task candidates read a factual text which contains 10 gaps.
are missing. There is a list of possible responses for the second
They choose the correct word from a choice of three and copy the
speaker, lettered A–G. Candidates select the appropriate response in
correct words in the gaps. This task has a grammatical focus.
each case and write the letter in the gap. There is one response which
does not fit the dialogue. Part 7
Part 4 Candidates read a gapped text often in the form of a diary or a letter.
Candidates write one word in each of the five gaps. There is no list
Candidates read a gapped text and look at words in a box beside the
of words for candidates to choose from. Both lexis and grammar are
text. They then copy the correct word in each of the five gaps. The
tested in this task.
missing words are nouns, adjectives, verbs (present and past tense)
Summary of Flyers Reading & Writing test
Number of
Parts Main skill focus Input Expected response
questions
1 Reading definitions and matching Nouns and definitions Copy the correct words next to the 10
to words definitions
Copying words
2 Reading sentences about a picture Picture and sentences Write ‘yes’/‘no’ 7
Writing one-word answers
3 Reading and completing a Half a dialogue with responses in Select correct response and write 5
continuous dialogue a box A–H in gap
Writing letters
4 Reading for specific information and Cloze text with words Choose and copy missing words 6
gist in a box correctly. Tick a box to choose the
Copying words best title for the story
5 Reading a story Story, picture and gapped sentences Complete sentences about story 7
Completing sentences by writing one, two, three or four
words
6 Reading and understanding a factual Gapped text and 3-option multiple- Complete text by selecting the 10
text choice (grammatical words) correct words and copying them in
Copying words the corresponding gaps
7 Reading and understanding a short Gapped text Write words in gaps 5
text (e.g. page from diary or letter) No answer options given
Providing words
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 33

===== PAGE 36 =====
FLYERS | READING & WRITING
Recommendations for candidate preparation Spend plenty of time establishing which words in the response refer
back to the first speaker’s words and therefore indicate a correct
General comment answer.
Many marks are lost because letters and/or words are not clearly Part 4
written. Remind candidates to check that their handwriting is clear
Candidates should be encouraged to read the whole text to get a
enough to be read by someone who is not familiar with it. It is often
general idea of what it is about before trying to complete the first
better not to use joined-up writing, as letters can become confused
gap. Lexical and grammatical competence is being tested, so make
and unclear.
sure candidates realise that they need to read the text surrounding
Candidates should be reminded to write only as much as they need
the question to be able to correctly fill the gap. Practice in guessing
to, as marks are often lost attempting unnecessarily long answers,
which word, and which kind of word, could go into each gap would
which provide more opportunities for making mistakes.
be extremely useful. Candidates can then confirm their guesses by
Because young candidates are unlikely to have had much experience seeing, and choosing from, the options on the facing page.
managing their time in exams, it can be helpful when doing classroom
Give candidates practice in choosing the right form of words (plural/
tasks to give a time limit, both to improve concentration and prevent
singular nouns, adjectives, verbs) within sentences and texts. Help
candidates being distracted by other things.
them to identify words or structures that will indicate what kind of
Make sure candidates are familiar with the structures and words in word the answer is likely to be, e.g. if the gap is preceded by ‘some’,
the Starters, Movers and Flyers syllabuses. the answer cannot be a countable singular noun.
Part 1 Part 5
Help candidates become familiar with vocabulary in a particular area Useful practice for candidates can be gained from identifying lexis in,
of lexis (see thematic vocabulary lists at the back of this handbook) and establishing what is happening in, a picture. Candidates can then
and practise distinguishing between words on the vocabulary list that be given longer texts to read based around the picture.
are similar, or commonly confused.
In order to understand the story, give candidates practice in
Encourage candidates to read all the options before they answer identifying different ways of referring to people or objects (e.g. John,
the questions, so that they become aware of all the different related he, him, Paul’s brother), and how sentences can be turned around
words. whilst retaining their meaning (e.g. Last Sunday, our family went to the
park to have a picnic can become The family had a picnic in the park on
Tell candidates to make sure they read the whole sentence carefully
Sunday). Also, practice in identifying what is being referred to in a
before answering.
text, especially the meaning of pronouns and adverbs such as here
Remind them to be careful when copying their answers; many and there will be useful.
candidates lose marks by leaving out articles, adding unnecessary
Remind candidates to copy the spelling correctly when taking words
articles, forgetting to make words plural, or by misspelling them.
from the text.
Part 2
Part 6
Remind candidates that the whole sentence must be completely true
As with Part 4 above, candidates should practise forming and
to warrant a yes answer. Make sure they read the whole sentence
choosing the correct type of word (nouns, adjectives, verbs, etc.) to
carefully before answering.
fit into sentences or texts.
Give candidates plenty of practice matching pictures and sentences,
Remind candidates that the options are given, so it is not necessary
drawing their attention to key elements of vocabulary or grammar in
to think of a word to fit the space.
the sentences and using pictures which make these distinctions clear.
Give more pictures than sentences, so that they really have to pay Make sure candidates are familiar with past forms of regular and
attention to the distinctions between, for example, spots and stripes. irregular verbs in the Flyers vocabulary list.
Part 3 Part 7
Remind candidates to read all the alternatives before choosing Give candidates plenty of practice in using common collocations such
the correct one. There may initially appear to be more than one as ask a question, do some homework, etc.
correct alternative, but an understanding of discourse features and
Remind candidates to look for Part 7 on the back page of the test
referencing will provide the correct answer.
booklet. Some candidates have left all the answer spaces blank and
Practise appropriate responses, not just to questions, but also to may not have realised that there was one more part to complete.
statements.
As with all gap-fill tasks, candidates should practise choosing words
Give candidates plenty of practice in using the set (formulaic) which fit the surrounding text lexically and grammatically and which
expressions in the vocabulary lists, and with short yes/no answers. help the text make sense. Make sure they do not just consider the
text immediately before and/or after the gap. Their choice of a
Give candidates practice in choosing appropriate responses, by giving
correct answer may depend on something said further back or further
them prompts or questions of the kind found in this part and asking
ahead in the text. Encourage candidates to self-edit, making sure
them to predict responses, before giving them the options.
they re-read the whole text through before they decide their final
answers.
34 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 37 =====
FLYERS | SPEAKING
Flyers
Speaking
7–9 minutes/4 parts
The Speaking test is a face-to-face test with one candidate and one examiner. It lasts approximately 8 minutes. The examiner’s language is scripted to
ensure fairness to all candidates. The script gives examiners scope to offer help and encouragement.
Each child is taken into the test by an usher. This is someone who speaks the candidate’s first language and may be known to the child. The usher
explains the test format in the child’s first language, before taking the child into the exam room and introducing them to the examiner.
The mark for the Speaking test is based on a rating for interactive listening ability, pronunciation, production of appropriate and extended responses,
and grammar and vocabulary.
Part 1 Part 3
The examiner greets the candidate and checks the candidate’s name. The examiner shows the candidate a sequence of five pictures which
This part is unassessed. show a story. The examiner tells the candidate the name of the story
and describes the first picture in the story. He/she then asks the
The examiner starts the test by demonstrating what is required and
candidate to describe the other four pictures.
showing the candidate two pictures which are similar but have some
differences. The examiner reads statements about the examiner’s Part 4
picture. The candidate must look at the candidate’s picture, identify
The examiner asks the candidate some personal questions on topics
six differences and say how the picture is different.
such as school, holidays, birthdays, family and hobbies.
Part 2
The examiner asks the candidate questions about a person, place
or object, based on a set of question cues. The candidate responds,
using a set of information cues. The candidate then asks the examiner
questions based on a set of different question cues.
Summary of Flyers Speaking test
Parts Main skill focus Input Expected response
1 Understanding statements and Two similar pictures (one is the Identify six differences in candidate’s
responding with differences examiner’s) picture from statements about examiner’s
Oral statements about examiner’s picture picture
2 Responding to questions with short One set of facts and one set of question Answer and ask questions about two
answers cues people, objects or situations
Forming questions to elicit information
3 Understanding the beginning of a story Picture sequence Describe each picture in turn
and then continuing it based on a series
of pictures
4 Understanding and responding to Open-ended questions about candidate Answer personal questions
personal questions
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 35

===== PAGE 38 =====
FLYERS | SPEAKING
Recommendations for candidate preparation There is a big present for David.
He’s playing the drums very loudly.
Candidates in the Flyers Speaking test are required to follow
instructions and talk in a simple way about different visual prompts, Candidates should also be able to describe simple feelings, for
and to answer simple questions about themselves. These are example:
standard tasks in most English classes for young learners. The David’s excited.
Cambridge Young Learners English Tests Sample Papers give examples
Part 4
of the kind of pictures, instructions and questions candidates will be
asked to respond to.
Make sure candidates feel confident answering questions about
themselves, their families and friends, their homes, their school and
Part 1
free time activities, their likes and dislikes and other topics related to
For Part 1, candidates should practise listening to the teacher make their everyday lives. They should be able to answer questions such as:
a statement about a picture (for example, In my picture, the clock is
What time do you get up on Saturday?
black), relating that to a picture in front of them, and commenting
What do you do on Saturday afternoon?
on the difference: In my picture, the clock is red. In the test, differences
between the examiner’s statements and the candidate’s picture will Simple answers of a phrase or one or two short sentences are all that
relate to things like number, colour, position, appearance, activity, is required.
shape, and relative size, etc. For example:
Questions will normally be in the present tense but candidates should
In my picture there are two/three drinks on the table. also be prepared to use the past and present perfect tenses and
In my picture, there’s a helicopter in the sky/on the ground. going to, and to answer questions about, for example, what they did
yesterday or are going to do at the weekend.
Part 2
As well as having practice in answering questions, candidates should
also practise asking them. For example, in Part 2, they should be able Flyers topics
to form simple questions to ask for information about people, things
(cid:698)(cid:886) animals
and situations. This will include information about time, place, age,
(cid:698)(cid:886) the body and the face
appearance, etc. Candidates should be able to ask ‘question-word
(cid:698)(cid:886) clothes
questions’ using Who, What, When, Where, How old, How many, etc.
(cid:698)(cid:886) colours
For example:
(cid:698)(cid:886) family and friends
What are the children studying?
(cid:698)(cid:886) food and drink
They should also be able to ask ‘Yes/No questions’, for example: (cid:698)(cid:886) health
(cid:698)(cid:886) the home
Has Harry’s teacher got a car?
(cid:698)(cid:886) materials
Additionally, they need to be comfortable asking questions with two (cid:698)(cid:886) numbers 1–1,000
options. For example: (cid:698)(cid:886) places and directions
Is the lesson interesting or boring? (cid:698)(cid:886) school
(cid:698)(cid:886) sports and leisure
Part 3 (cid:698)(cid:886) time
(cid:698)(cid:886) toys
The Part 3 task involves candidates telling a simple story based on
(cid:698)(cid:886) transport
five pictures, and candidates will benefit from practice in telling
(cid:698)(cid:886) weather
similar simple picture stories. However, examiners are not looking for
(cid:698)(cid:886) work
evidence of storytelling skills. Candidates are only expected to say a
(cid:698)(cid:886) the world around us
few words about each picture in the sequence, without necessarily
developing these comments into a narrative.
Before asking candidates to tell the story, the examiner says, ‘Just look
at the pictures first’. Advise candidates to look at each picture in turn
to get a general idea of the story before they start to speak. However,
they should not worry if they cannot follow the narrative of the
picture story. It is perfectly acceptable just to say a few words about
each picture in the sequence without developing these comments
into a story. The examiner will prompt by asking a question if a
candidate needs help.
The structures candidates will need most frequently are there is/are,
the present tense of the verbs be and have (got), the modals can/can’t
and must/mustn’t and the present continuous tense of some action
verbs (for example, come, go, buy, put on, carry, open, laugh). They may
also need to use the present perfect tense or going to. They should be
able to say things like:
36 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 39 =====
FLYERS | GRAMMAR & STRUCTURES LIST
Flyers
grammar and structures list
The list below details what is new at Flyers level. Flyers candidates will be expected to know everything on this list in addition to the lists at Starters
and Movers levels. See vocabulary lists for a comprehensive list of words in each category.
Examples
Verbs
(Positive, negative, question, imperative and short answer forms,
including contractions)
Past continuous (for interrupted actions and background setting) I was walking down the road when I saw her.
It was a very cold day and snow was falling.
Present perfect Have you ever been to the circus?
He’s just eaten his dinner.
Be going to It isn’t going to rain today.
Will Will you do your homework this evening?
I won’t buy her a CD because she doesn’t like music.
Might Vicky might come to the party.
May The bus may not come today because there is a lot of snow.
Shall for suggestions Shall we have a picnic in the park?
Could You could invite Robert to the football game.
Should Should we take a towel to the swimming pool?
Tag questions That’s John’s book, isn’t it?
Adverbs I haven’t bought my brother’s birthday present yet.
Conjunctions I didn’t want to walk home so I went on the bus.
If clauses (in zero conditionals) If it’s sunny, we go swimming.
Where clauses My grandmother has forgotten where she put her glasses.
Before/after clauses (not with future reference) I finished my homework before I played football.
Be/look/sound/feel/taste/smell like What’s your new teacher like?
That sounds like the baby upstairs. I think he’s crying.
Make somebody/something + adj That smell makes me hungry!
What time …? What time does the film start?
What else/next? What else shall I draw?
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 37

===== PAGE 40 =====
FLYERS | GRAMMAR & STRUCTURES LIST
Examples
See you soon/later/tomorrow etc. See you next week, Mrs Ball!
Be made of The toy is made of wood.
38 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 41 =====
FLYERS | ALPHABETIC VOCABULARY LIST
Flyers
Grammatical Key
alphabetic vocabulary list adj adjective int interrogative
adv adverb n noun
conj conjunction poss possessive
The following words appear for the first time at Flyers level. det determiner prep preposition
dis discourse marker pron pronoun
excl exclamation v verb
A
a.m. (for time) ago adv ambulance n artist n
across prep agree v anyone pron astronaut n
actor n air n anything pron August n
actually adv airport n anywhere adv autumn n (US fall)
adventure n alone adj April n away adv
advice n already adv arrive v
after adv + conj also adv art n
B
backpack n (UK rucksack) bicycle n break v burn v
before adv + conj bin n bridge n business n
begin v biscuit n (US cookie) bright adj (of colour) businessman/woman n
believe v bit n broken adj butter n
belt n bored adj brush n + v butterfly n
Betty n brave adj building n
C
calendar n century n club n cooker n
camel n channel n collect v cookie n (UK biscuit)
camp v cheap adj college n corner n
card n chemist(’s) n comb n + v could v (for possibility)
cartoon n chess n competition n crown n
castle n chopsticks n concert n cut v
cave n Christmas n conversation n
centimetre n circus n cook n
D
dangerous adj dear adj (as in Dear Harry) describe v dinosaur n
dark adj December n desert n drum n
date n (as in time) decide v diary n during prep
David n dentist n dictionary n
E
each det + pron end v ever adv expensive adj
early adj + adv engineer n everywhere adv explain v
east n enough adj + pron exam n extinct adj
else adv entrance n excellent adj + excl
Emma n envelope n excited adj
empty adj environment n exit n
F
fact n find out v flour n friendly adj
factory n finger n fog n front adj + n
fall over v finish v foggy adj full adj
far adj + adv fire n follow v fun adj + n
fast adj + adv fire engine n (US fire truck) footballer n fur n
February n fire station n for prep of time future n
feel v fireman/woman n forget v
fetch v flag n fork n
a few det flashlight n (UK torch) fridge n
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 39

===== PAGE 42 =====
FLYERS | ALPHABETIC VOCABULARY LIST
G
gate n get to v go out v group n
geography n glass adj goal n grow v
George n glove n gold adj + n guess n + v
get married v glue n + v golf n
H
half adj + n hear v himself pron hotel n
happen v heavy adj history n hour n
hard adj + adv Helen n Holly n How long adv + int
Harry n herself pron honey n hurry v
hate v high adj hope v husband n
headteacher n hill n horrible adj
I
ice n important adj insect n itself pron
if conj improve v instrument n
ill adj information n interesting adj
J
jam n join v (a club) July n
January n journalist n June n
job n journey n just adv
K
Katy n key n kind adj knife n
keep v kilometre n (US kilometer) king n
L
language n left adj + n (as in direction) light adj + n lovely adj
large adj let v little adj low adj
late adj + adv letter n (as in mail) a little adv + det lucky adj
later adv lie v (as in lie down) London n
lazy adj lift v look after v
leave v lift n (ride) look like v
M
magazine n meal n Michael n missing adj
make sure v mechanic n midday n mix v
March n medicine n middle n+ adj money n
married adj meet v midnight n month n
match n (football) meeting n might v much adv + det + pron
maths n (US math) member n million n museum n
May n (as in month) metal adj + n mind v myself pron
may v metre n (US meter) minute n
N
necklace n next adj + adv normal adj nowhere adv
news n noisy adj north n
newspaper n no-one pron November n
O
o’clock adv of course adv online adj
October n office n other det + pron
octopus n once adv over adv + prep
P
p.m. (for time) pepper n plastic adj + n post v
painter n perhaps adv player n post office n
paper adj + n photographer n pocket n postcard n
partner n piece n police station n prefer v
passenger n pilot n policeman/woman n prepare v
past noun + prep pizza n poor adj prize n
path n planet n popular adj problem n
40 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 43 =====
FLYERS | ALPHABETIC VOCABULARY LIST
programme n (US pull v pyramid n
program) push v
Q
quarter n queen n quite adv
R
race n + v repair v Richard n Robert n
railway n repeat v right adj + n (as in rocket n
ready adj restaurant n direction) rucksack n (US backpack)
remember v rich adj ring n
S
salt n silver adj + n sound n + v strange adj
same adj since prep south n stripe n
Sarah n singer n space n striped adj
save v single adj speak v student n
science n ski n + v special adj study v
scissors n sky n spend v subject n
score n + v sledge n + v spoon n such det
screen n smell n + v spot n suddenly adv
secret n snack n spotted adj sugar n
secretary n snowball n spring n suitcase n
sell v snowboarding n stage n (theatre) summer n
send v snowman n stamp n sunglasses n
September n so adv + conj stay v sure adj
several adj soap n steal v surname n
shelf n soft adj still adv swan n
shorts n somewhere adv storm n swing n + v
should v soon adv straight on adv
T
take v (as in time tent n timetable n traffic n
e.g. it takes 20 minutes) thank v toe n turn v
tape recorder n theatre n together adv turn off v
taste n + v thousand n toilet n turn on v
taxi n through prep tomorrow adv + n twice adv
teach v tidy adj + v tonight adv + n
team n tights n torch n (US flashlight)
telephone n time n tour n
U
umbrella n uniform n until prep usually adv
unfriendly adj university n unusual adj
unhappy adj untidy adj use v
V
view n violin n visit v volleyball n
W
waiter n whisper v win v wonderful adj
warm adj whistle v wing n wood n
way n wife n winner n wool n
west n wild adj winter n worried adj
wheel n will v wish n + v
where pron William n without prep
X
(No words at this level)
Y
yet adv you’re welcome excl yourself pron
Z
zero n
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 41

===== PAGE 44 =====
FLYERS | ALPHABETIC VOCABULARY LIST
Numbers
Candidates will be expected to understand and write numbers 101–1,000 and ordinals 21st–31st.
Names
Candidates will be expected to recognise and write the following names:
Betty Harry Michael William
David Helen Richard
Emma Holly Robert
George Katy Sarah
42 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 45 =====
STARTERS & MOVERS | COMBINED ALPHABETIC
Starters and Movers
Grammatical Key
combined alphabetic vocabulary list adj adjective int interrogative
adv adverb n noun
conj conjunction poss possessive
S First appears at Starters level det determiner prep preposition
M First appears at Movers level dis discourse marker pron pronoun
excl exclamation v verb
A
a det S age n M angry adj S arm n S
about prep S Alex n S animal n S armchair n S
above prep M alien n S Ann n S ask v S
add v S all adj + adv + det + pron M Anna n S at prep of place S
address n M all right adj + adv M another det + pron M at prep of time M
afraid adj M alphabet n S answer n + v S aunt n M
after prep M always adv M any det + pron M awake adj M
afternoon n S an det S apartment n (UK flat) S
again adv S and conj S apple n S
B
baby n S be called v M bird n S boy n S
back adj + adv + n M beach n S birthday n S bread n S
bad adj M bean n S black adj S break n M
badly adv M bear n M blanket n M breakfast n S
badminton n S beard n M blond(e) adj M bring v M
bag n S beautiful adj S blue adj S brother n S
balcony n M because conj M board n S brown adj S
ball n S bed n S boat n S burger n S
balloon n S bedroom n S body n S bus n S
banana n S before prep M book n S bus station n M
band (music) n M behind prep S bookcase n S bus stop n M
bank n M below prep M bookshop n S busy adj M
baseball n S Ben n S boring adj M but conj S
basement n M best adj + adv M both det + pron M buy v M
basketball n S better adj + adv M bottle n M by prep M
bat n M between prep S bottom adj + n M bye (-bye) excl S
bath n S big adj S bounce v S
bathroom n S bike n S bowl n M
be v S Bill n S box n S
C
café n M chair n S clock n S cook v M
cage n M change v M close v S correct adj S
cake n S Charlie n M closed adj S cough n M
call v M cheese n M clothes n S could v (as in past of can
camera n S chicken n S cloud n M for ability) M
can v S child/children n S cloudy adj M country n M
candy n (UK sweet(s)) S chips n (US fries) S clown n M countryside n M
car n S chocolate n S coat n M cousin n S
careful adj M choose v S coconut n S cow n S
carefully adv M cinema n M coffee n M crocodile n S
carrot n S circle n M cold adj + n M cross n + v S
carry v M city n M colour n + v S cry v M
cat n S city/town centre n M come v S cup n M
catch v (e.g. a ball) S class n S come on! excl M cupboard n S
catch v (e.g. a bus) M classroom n S comic n M curly adj M
CD n M clean adj + v S comic book n M
CD player n M clever adj M complete v S
centre n M climb v M computer n S
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 43

===== PAGE 46 =====
STARTERS & MOVERS | COMBINED ALPHABETIC
D
dad(dy) n S dining room n S double adj S drive n M
Daisy n M dinner n S down adv + prep M driver n M
Dan n S dirty adj S downstairs adv + n M drop v M
dance v M do v S draw v S dry adj + v M
daughter n M doctor n M drawing n S duck n S
day n S dog n S dream n + v M DVD n M
desk n S doll n S dress n S DVD player n M
difference n M dolphin n M dress up v M
different adj M don’t worry excl S drink n + v S
difficult adj M door n S drive v S
E
ear n S elephant n S enjoy v S everything pron M
earache n M elevator n (UK lift) M eraser n (UK rubber) S example n S
easy adj M email n + v M evening n S exciting adj M
eat v S end n S every det M excuse me dis M
egg n S English adj + n S everyone pron M eye n S
F
face n S favourite adj S floor n S forest n M
fair adj M field n M floor n (e.g. ground, 1st, Fred n M
fall v M film n + v (US movie) M etc.) M Friday n M
family n S find v S flower n S friend n S
famous adj M fine adj + excl M fly v S fries n (UK chips) S
fan n M first adj + adv M fly n M frightened adj M
farm n M fish (s + pl) n S food n S frog n S
farmer n M fish v M foot/feet n S from prep S
fat adj M fishing n S football n (US soccer) S fruit n S
father n S flat n (US apartment) S for prep S funny adj S
G
game n S girl n S Grace n S grape n S
garden n S give v S grandchild(ren) n M grass n M
get v S glass n M granddaughter n M gray adj (UK grey) S
get dressed v M glasses n S grandfather n S great adj + excl S
get off v M go v S grandma n S green adj S
get on v M go shopping v M grandmother n S grey adj (US gray) S
get undressed v M goat n S grandpa n S ground n M
get up v M good adj S grandparent n M grown-up n M
giraffe n S goodbye excl S grandson n M guitar n S
H
hair n S headache n M hit v S house n S
hall n S helicopter n S hobby n S how int S
hand n S hello excl S hockey n S how adv M
handbag n S help v M hold v S how many int S
happy adj S her poss adj + pron S holiday n M how much adv + int M
hat n S here adv S home n + adv S how often adv + int M
have v S hers pron S homework n M how old int S
have got v S hide v M hop v M hundred n M
have (got) to v M him pron S horse n S hungry adj M
he pron S hippo n S hospital n M hurt v M
head n S his poss adj + pron S hot adj M
I
I pron S in prep of place + time S internet n M island n M
ice cream n S in front of prep S into prep M it pron S
idea n M inside adv + n + prep M invite v M its poss adj + pron S
J
Jack n M Jane n M Jill n S John n M
jacket n S jeans n S Jim n M juice n S
44 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 47 =====
STARTERS & MOVERS | COMBINED ALPHABETIC
jump v S jungle n M
K
kangaroo n M kick n M kitchen n S know v S
keyboard n (computer) S Kim n S kite n S
kick v S kind n M kitten n M
L
lake n M let’s v S live v S a lot of det S
lamp n S letter n (as in alphabet) S living room n S lots adv + pron S
last adj + adv M library n M lizard n S lots of det S
laugh n + v M lift n (US elevator) M long adj S loud adj M
leaf/leaves n M like prep + v S look v S loudly adv M
learn v S Lily n M look at v S love v S
leg n S lime n S look for v M Lucy n S
lemon n S line n S lorry n (US truck) S lunch n S
lemonade n S lion n M lose v M
lesson n S listen v S a lot adv + pron S
M
make v S me too dis S monster n S mouth n S
man/men n S mean v M moon n M move v M
mango n S meat n S more adv + det + pron M movie n (UK film) M
many det S message n M morning n S Mr title S
map n M milk n S most adv + det + pron M Mrs title S
market n M mine pron S mother n S mum(my) n S
Mary n M mirror n S motorbike n S music n S
mat n S Miss title S mountain n M must v M
matter n M mistake n M mouse/mice n S my poss adj S
May n (girl’s name) S Monday n M mouse n (computer) S
me pron S monkey n S moustache n M
N
name n S never adv M night n S nothing pron M
naughty adj M new adj S no adv + det S now adv S
near adv + prep M next to prep S noise n M number n S
neck n M nice adj S nose n S nurse n M
need v M Nick n S not adv S
O
of prep S old adj S open adj + v S out adv M
off adv + prep M on prep of place S opposite prep M out of prep M
often adv M on adv + prep of time M or conj S outside adv + n + prep M
oh dis S one det + pron S orange adj + n S
oh dear excl S onion n S our poss adj S
OK adj + dis S only adv M ours pron S
P
page n S Pat n S pick up v S please dis S
paint n + v S Paul n M picnic n M point v S
painting n S pea n S picture n S pool n M
pair n M pear n S pineapple n S potato n S
panda n M pen n S pink adj S present n M
pardon int S pencil n S pirate n M pretty adj M
parent n M person/people n S place n M puppy n M
park n S pet n M plane n S purple adj S
parrot n M Peter n M plant n + v M put v S
part n S phone n + v S plate n M put on v M
party n M photo n S play v S
pasta n M piano n S playground n S
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 45

===== PAGE 48 =====
STARTERS & MOVERS | COMBINED ALPHABETIC
Q
question n S quickly adv M quietly adv M
quick adj M quiet adj M
R
rabbit n M red adj S river n M round adj + adv + prep M
radio n S rice n S road n M rubber n (US eraser) S
rain n + v M ride v S robot n S ruler n S
rainbow n M ride n M rock n M run v S
read v S right dis S roof n M
really adv S right adj (as in correct) S room n S
S
sad adj S shell n S snake n S station n M
safe adj M shirt n S snow n + v M stomach n M
sail n + v M shoe n S so dis S stomach-ache n M
salad n M shop n (US store) S soccer n (UK football) S stop v S
Sally n M shop v M sock n S store n (UK shop) S
Sam n S shopping n M sofa n S story n S
sand n S shopping centre n M some det S straight adj M
sandwich n M short adj S someone pron M street n S
Saturday n M shoulder n M something pron M strong adj M
sausage n S shout v M sometimes adv M Sue n S
say v S show v S son n M sun n S
scarf n M shower n M song n S Sunday n M
school n S sing v S sorry adj + int S sunny adj M
sea n S sister n S soup n M supermarket n M
seat n M sit v S spell v S supper n S
second adj + adv M skate n + v M spider n S surprised adj M
see v S skip v M sport n S sweater n M
See you! excl S skirt n S sports centre n M sweet(s) n (US candy) S
sentence n S sleep v S square adj + n M sweet adj M
shall v M slow adj M stair(s) n M swim v S
shark n M slowly adv M stand v S swim n M
she pron S small adj S star n M swimming pool n M
sheep (s + pl) n S smile n + v S start v S
T
table n S than conj + prep M this det + pron S towel n M
table tennis n S thank you dis S those det + pron S town n M
tail n S thanks dis S throw v S town/city centre n M
take v M that det + pron S Thursday n M toy n S
take a photo/picture v S the det S tick n + v S train n S
take off v their poss adj S ticket n M travel v M
(i.e. get undressed) M theirs pron S tiger n S treasure n M
talk v S them pron S tired adj M tree n S
tall adj M then dis S to prep S trip n M
tea n M then adv M today adv + n S trousers n S
teacher n S there adv S Tom n S truck n (UK lorry) S
television/TV n S these det + pron S tomato n S try n + v S
tell v S they pron S Tony n S T-shirt n S
temperature n M thin adj M too adv S Tuesday n M
tennis n S thing n M tooth/teeth n M TV/television n S
terrible adj M think v M toothache n M
test n + v S third adj + adv M toothbrush n M
text n + v M thirsty adj M top adj + n M
U
ugly adj S under prep S up adv + prep M us pron S
uncle n M understand v S upstairs adv + n M
46 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 49 =====
STARTERS & MOVERS | COMBINED ALPHABETIC
V
vegetable n M Vicky n M village n M
very adv S video n + v M
W
wait v M weak adj M when adv + conj + int M woman/women n S
wake (up) v M wear v S where int S word n S
walk v S weather n M which int S work n + v M
walk n M website n M which pron M world n M
wall n S Wednesday n M white adj S worse adj + adv M
want v S week n M who int S worst adj + adv M
wash n + v M weekend n M who pron M would v M
watch n + v S well dis S whose int S would like v S
water n S well adj + adv M why int M wow! excl S
waterfall n M well done dis S wind n M write v S
watermelon n S wet adj M window n S wrong adj M
wave v S whale n M windy adj M
we pron S what int S with prep S
X
(No words at these levels)
Y
year n S yes adv S you pron S your poss adj S
yellow adj S yesterday adv + n M young adj S yours pron S
Z
zoo n S
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 47

===== PAGE 50 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED ALPHABETIC
Starters, Movers and Flyers
Grammatical Key
combined alphabetic vocabulary list adj adjective int interrogative
adv adverb n noun
conj conjunction poss possessive
S First appears at Starters level det determiner prep preposition
M First appears at Movers level dis discourse marker pron pronoun
excl exclamation v verb
F First appears at Flyers level
A
a det S again adv S ambulance n F April n F
a.m. (for time) F age n M an det S arm n S
about prep S ago adv F and conj S armchair n S
above prep M agree v F angry adj S arrive v F
across prep F air n F animal n S art n F
actor n F airport n F Ann n S artist n F
actually adv F Alex n S Anna n S ask v S
add v S alien n S another det + pron M astronaut n F
address n M all adj + adv + det + pron M answer n + v S at prep of place S
adventure n F all right adj + adv M any det + pron M at prep of time M
advice n F alone adj F anyone pron F August n F
afraid adj M alphabet n S anything pron F aunt n M
after prep M already adv F anywhere adv F autumn n (US fall) F
after adv + conj F also adv F apartment n (UK flat) S awake adj M
afternoon n S always adv M apple n S away adv F
B
baby n S beard n M biscuit n (US cookie) F break v F
back adj + adv + n M beautiful adj S bit n F breakfast n S
backpack n (UK rucksack) F because conj M black adj S bridge n F
bad adj M bed n S blanket n M bright adj (of colour) F
badly adv M bedroom n S blond(e) adj M bring v M
badminton n S before prep M blue adj S broken adj F
bag n S before adv + conj F board n S brother n S
balcony n M begin v F boat n S brown adj S
ball n S behind prep S body n S brush n + v F
balloon n S believe v F book n S building n F
banana n S below prep M bookcase n S burger n S
band (music) n M belt n F bookshop n S burn v F
bank n M Ben n S bored adj F bus n S
baseball n S best adj + adv M boring adj M bus station n M
basement n M better adj + adv M both det + pron M bus stop n M
basketball n S Betty n F bottle n M business n F
bat n M between prep S bottom adj + n M businessman/woman n F
bath n S bicycle n F bounce v S busy adj M
bathroom n S big adj S bowl n M but conj S
be v S bike n S box n S butter n F
be called v M Bill n S boy n S butterfly n F
beach n S bin n F brave adj F buy v M
bean n S bird n S bread n S by prep M
bear n M birthday n S break n M bye (-bye) excl S
C
café n M camp v F carrot n S cave n F
cage n M can v S carry v M CD n M
cake n S candy n (UK sweet(s)) S cartoon n F CD player n M
calendar n F car n S castle n F centimetre n (US
call v M card n F cat n S centimeter) F
camel n F careful adj M catch v (e.g. a ball) S centre n M
camera n S carefully adv M catch v (e.g. a bus) M century n F
48 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 51 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED ALPHABETIC
chair n S city n M cold adj + n M corner n F
change v M city/town centre n M collect v F correct adj S
channel n F class n S college n F cough n M
Charlie n M classroom n S colour n + v S could v (as in past of can
cheap adj F clean adj + v S comb n + v F for ability) M
cheese n M clever adj M come v S could v (for possibility) F
chemist(’s) n F climb v M come on! excl M country n M
chess n F clock n S comic n M countryside n M
chicken n S close v S comic book n M cousin n S
child/children n S closed adj S competition n F cow n S
chips n (US fries) S clothes n S complete v S crocodile n S
chocolate n S cloud n M computer n S cross n + v S
choose v S cloudy adj M concert n F crown n F
chopsticks n F clown n M conversation n F cry v M
Christmas n F club n F cook v M cup n M
cinema n M coat n M cook n F cupboard n S
circle n M coconut n S cooker n F curly adj M
circus n F coffee n M cookie n (UK biscuit) F cut v F
D
dad(dy) n S dentist n F doctor n M drink n + v S
Daisy n M describe v F dog n S drive v S
Dan n S desert n F doll n S drive n M
dance v M desk n S dolphin n M driver n M
dangerous adj F diary n F don’t worry excl S drop v M
dark adj F dictionary n F door n S drum n F
date n (as in time) F difference n M double adj S dry adj + v M
daughter n M different adj M down adv + prep M duck n S
David n F difficult adj M downstairs adv + n M during prep F
day n S dining room n S draw v S DVD n M
dear adj (as in Dear dinner n S drawing n S DVD player n M
Harry) F dinosaur n F dream n + v M
December n F dirty adj S dress n S
decide v F do v S dress up v M
E
each det + pron F email n + v M environment n F excited adj F
ear n S Emma n F eraser n (UK rubber) S exciting adj M
earache n M empty adj F evening n S excuse me dis M
early adj + adv F end n S ever adv F exit n F
east n F end v F every det M expensive adj F
easy adj M engineer n F everyone pron M explain v F
eat v S English adj + n S everything pron M extinct adj F
egg n S enjoy v S everywhere adv F eye n S
elephant n S enough adj + pron F exam n F
elevator n (UK lift) M entrance n F example n S
else adv F envelope n F excellent adj + excl F
F
face n S fast adj + adv F finger n F flat n (US apartment) S
fact n F fat adj M finish v F floor n S
factory n F father n S fire n F floor n (e.g. ground, 1st,
fair adj M favourite adj S fire engine n (US fire etc.) M
fall v M February n F truck) F flour n F
fall n (UK autumn) F feel v F fire station n F flower n S
fall over v F fetch v F fireman/woman n F fly v S
family n S a few det F first adj + adv M fly n M
famous adj M field n M fish (s + pl) n S fog n F
fan n M film n + v (US movie) M fish v M foggy adj F
far adj + adv F find v S fishing n S follow v F
farm n M find out v F flag n F food n S
farmer n M fine adj + excl M flashlight n (UK torch) F foot/feet n S
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 49

===== PAGE 52 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED ALPHABETIC
football n (US soccer) S fork n F fries n (UK chips) S full adj F
footballer n F Fred n M frightened adj M fun adj + n F
for prep S Friday n M frog n S funny adj S
for prep of time F fridge n F from prep S fur n F
forest n M friend n S front adj + n F future n F
forget v F friendly adj F fruit n S
G
game n S giraffe n S gold adj + n F grape n S
garden n S girl n S golf n F grass n M
gate n F give v S good adj S gray adj (UK grey) S
geography n F glass adj F goodbye excl S great adj + excl S
George n F glass n M Grace n S green adj S
get v S glasses n S grandchild(ren) n M grey adj (US gray) S
get dressed v M glove n F granddaughter n M ground n M
get married v F glue n + v F grandfather n S group n F
get off v M go v S grandma n S grow v F
get on v M go out v F grandmother n S grown-up n M
get to v F go shopping v M grandpa n S guess n + v F
get undressed v M goal n F grandparent n M guitar n S
get up v M goat n S grandson n M
H
hair n S headteacher n F his poss adj + pron S hotel n F
half adj + n F hear v F history n F hour n F
hall n S heavy adj F hit v S house n S
hand n S Helen n F hobby n S how int S
handbag n S helicopter n S hockey n S how adv M
happen v F hello excl S hold v S how long adv + int F
happy adj S help v M holiday n M how many int S
hard adj + adv F her poss adj + pron S Holly n F how much adv + int M
Harry n F here adv S home n+adv S how often adv + int M
hat n S hers pron S homework n M how old int S
hate v F herself pron F honey n F hundred n M
have v S hide v M hop v M hungry adj M
have got v S high adj F hope v F hurry v F
have (got) to v M hill n F horrible adj F hurt v M
he pron S him pron S horse n S husband n F
head n S himself pron F hospital n M
headache n M hippo n S hot adj M
I
I pron S important adj F inside adv + n + prep M island n M
ice n F improve v F instrument n F it pron S
ice cream n S in prep of place + time S interesting adj F its poss adj + pron S
idea n M in front of prep S internet n M itself pron F
if conj F information n F into prep M
ill adj F insect n F invite v M
J
Jack n M jeans n S join v (a club) F jump v S
jacket n S Jill n S journalist n F June n F
jam n F Jim n M journey n F jungle n M
Jane n M job n F juice n S just adv F
January n F John n M July n F
K
kangaroo n M kick n M king n F
Katy n F kilometre n (US kitchen n S
keep v F kilometer) F kite n S
key n F Kim n S kitten n M
keyboard n (computer) S kind n M knife n F
kick v S kind adj F know v S
50 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 53 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED ALPHABETIC
L
lake n M lemon n S lime n S look like v F
lamp n S lemonade n S line n S lorry n (US truck) S
language n F lesson n S lion n M lose v M
large adj F let v F listen v S a lot adv + pron S
last adj + adv M let’s v S little adj F a lot of det S
late adj + adv F letter n (as in alphabet) S a little adv + det F lots adv + pron S
later adv F letter n (as in mail) F live v S lots of det S
laugh n + v M library n M living room n S loud adj M
lazy adj F lie v (as in lie down) F lizard n S loudly adv M
leaf/leaves n M lift n (US elevator) M London n F love v S
learn v S lift n (ride) F long adj S lovely adj F
leave v F lift v F look v S low adj F
left adj + n (as in light adj + n F look after v F lucky adj F
direction) F like prep + v S look at v S Lucy n S
leg n S Lily n M look for v M lunch n S
M
magazine n F me too dis S mind v F mountain n M
make v S meal n F mine pron S mouse/mice n S
make sure v F mean v M minute n F mouse n (computer) S
man/men n S meat n S mirror n S moustache n M
mango n S mechanic n F Miss title S mouth n S
many det S medicine n F missing adj F move v M
map n M meet v F mistake n M movie n (UK film) M
March n F meeting n F mix v F Mr title S
market n M member n F Monday n M Mrs title S
married adj F message n M money n F much adv + det + pron F
Mary n M metal adj + n F monkey n S mum(my) n S
mat n S metre n (US meter) F monster n S museum n F
match n (football) F Michael n F month n F music n S
maths n (US math) F midday n F moon n M must v M
matter n M middle n + adj F more adv + det + pron M my poss adj S
May n (as in girl’s name) S midnight n F morning n S myself pron F
May n F might v F most adv + det + pron M
may v F milk n S mother n S
me pron S million n F motorbike n S
N
name n S news n F noise n M November n F
naughty adj M newspaper n F noisy adj F now adv S
near adv + prep M next adj + adv F no-one pron F nowhere adv F
neck n M next to prep S normal adj F number n S
necklace n F nice adj S north n F nurse n M
need v M Nick n S nose n S
never adv M night n S not adv S
new adj S no adv + det S nothing pron M
O
o’clock adv F oh dis S onion n S our poss adj S
October n F oh dear excl S online adj F ours pron S
octopus n F OK adj + dis S only adv M out adv M
of prep S old adj S open adj + v S out of prep M
of course adv F on prep of place S opposite prep M outside adv + n + prep M
off adv + prep M on adv + prep of time M or conj S over adv + prep F
office n F once adv F orange adj + n S
often adv M one det + pron S other det + pron F
P
p.m. (for time) F painter n F panda n M parent n M
page n S painting n S paper adj + n F park n S
paint n + v S pair n M pardon int S parrot n M
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 51

===== PAGE 54 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED ALPHABETIC
part n S Peter n M plant n + v M potato n S
partner n F phone n + v S plastic adj + n F prefer v F
party n M photo n S plate n M prepare v F
passenger n F photographer n F play v S present n M
past n + prep F piano n S player n F pretty adj M
pasta n M pick up v S playground n S prize n F
Pat n S picnic n M please dis S problem n F
path n F picture n S pocket n F programme n
Paul n M piece n F point v S (US program) F
pea n S pilot n F police station n F pull v F
pear n S pineapple n S policeman/woman n F puppy n M
pen n S pink adj S pool n M purple adj S
pencil n S pirate n M poor adj F push v F
pepper n F pizza n F popular adj F put v S
perhaps adv F place n M post v F put on v M
person/people n S plane n S post office n F pyramid n F
pet n M planet n F postcard n F
Q
quarter n F question n S quickly adv M quietly adv M
queen n F quick adj M quiet adj M quite adv F
R
rabbit n M remember v F right adj + n (as in roof n M
race n + v F repair v F direction) F room n S
radio n S repeat v F right adj (as in correct) S round adj + adv + prep M
railway n F restaurant n F ring n F rubber n (US eraser) S
rain n + v M rice n S river n M rucksack n (US backpack) F
rainbow n M rich adj F road n M ruler n S
read v S Richard n F Robert n F run v S
ready adj F ride v S robot n S
really adv S ride n M rock n M
red adj S right dis S rocket n F
S
sad adj S See you! excl S sing v S sock n S
safe adj M sell v F singer n F sofa n S
sail n + v M send v F single adj F soft adj F
salad n M sentence n S sister n S some det S
Sally n M September n F sit v S someone pron M
salt n F several adj F skate n + v M something pron M
Sam n S shall v M ski n + v F sometimes adv M
same adj F shark n M skip v M somewhere adv F
sand n S she pron S skirt n S son n M
sandwich n M sheep (s + pl) n S sky n F song n S
Sarah n F shelf n F sledge n + v F soon adv F
Saturday n M shell n S sleep v S sorry adj + int S
sausage n S shirt n S slow adj M sound n + v F
save v F shoe n S slowly adv M soup n M
say v S shop n (US store) S small adj S south n F
scarf n M shop v M smell n + v F space n F
school n S shopping n M smile n + v S speak v F
science n F shopping centre n M snack n F special adj F
scissors n F short adj S snake n S spell v S
score n + v F shorts n F snow n + v M spend v F
screen n F should v F snowball n F spider n S
sea n S shoulder n M snowboarding n F spoon n F
seat n M shout v M snowman n F sport n S
second adj + adv M show v S so dis S sports centre n M
secret n F shower n M so adv + conj F spot n F
secretary n F silver adj + n F soap n F spotted adj F
see v S since prep F soccer n (UK football) S spring n F
52 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 55 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED ALPHABETIC
square adj + n M stop v S subject n F sure adj F
stage n (theatre) F store n (UK shop) S such det F surname n F
stair(s) n M storm n F suddenly adv F surprised adj M
stamp n F story n S Sue n S swan n F
stand v S straight adj M sugar n F sweater n M
star n M straight on adv F suitcase n F sweet(s) n (US candy) S
start v S strange adj F summer n F sweet adj M
station n M street n S sun n S swim v S
stay v F stripe n F Sunday n M swim n M
steal v F striped adj F sunglasses n F swimming pool n M
still adv F strong adj M sunny adj M swing n + v F
stomach n M student n F supermarket n M
stomach-ache n M study v F supper n S
T
table n S test n + v S through prep F top adj + n M
table tennis n S text n + v M throw v S torch n (US flashlight) F
tail n S than conj + prep M Thursday n M tour n F
take v M thank v F tick n + v S towel n M
take v (as in time e.g. it thank you dis S ticket n M town n M
takes 20 minutes) F thanks dis S tidy adj + v F town/city centre n M
take a photo/picture v S that det + pron S tiger n S toy n S
take off v (i.e. get the det S tights n F traffic n F
undressed) M theatre n F time n F train n S
talk v S their poss adj S timetable n F travel v M
tall adj M theirs pron S tired adj M treasure n M
tape recorder n F them pron S to prep S tree n S
taste n + v F then dis S today adv + n S trip n M
taxi n F then adv M toe n F trousers n S
tea n M there adv S together adv F truck n (UK lorry) S
teach v F these det + pron S toilet n F try n + v S
teacher n S they pron S Tom n S T-shirt n S
team n F thin adj M tomato n S Tuesday n M
telephone n F thing n M tomorrow adv + n F turn v F
television/TV n S think v M tonight adv + n F turn off v F
tell v S third adj + adv M Tony n S turn on v F
temperature n M thirsty adj M too adv S TV/television n S
tennis n S this det + pron S tooth/teeth n M twice adv F
tent n F those det + pron S toothache n M
terrible adj M thousand n F toothbrush n M
U
ugly adj S unfriendly adj F until prep F use v F
umbrella n F unhappy adj F unusual adj F usually adv F
uncle n M uniform n F up adv + prep M
under prep S university n F upstairs adv + n M
understand v S untidy adj F us pron S
V
vegetable n M video n + v M violin n F
very adv S view n F visit v F
Vicky n M village n M volleyball n F
W
wait v M wash n + v M weak adj M well adj + adv M
waiter n F watch n + v S wear v S well done dis S
wake (up) v M water n S weather n M west n F
walk v S waterfall n M website n M wet adj M
walk n M watermelon n S Wednesday n M whale n M
wall n S wave v S week n M what int S
want v S way n F weekend n M wheel n F
warm adj F we pron S well dis S when adv + conj + int M
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 53

===== PAGE 56 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED ALPHABETIC
where int S why int M winner n F work n + v M
where pron F wife n F winter n F world n M
which int S wild adj F wish n + v F worried adj F
which pron M will v F with prep S worse adj + adv M
whisper v F William n F without prep F worst adj + adv M
whistle v F win v F woman/women n S would v M
white adj S wind n M wonderful adj F would like v S
who int S window n S wood n F wow! excl S
who pron M windy adj M wool n F write v S
whose int S wing n F word n S wrong adj M
X
(No words at these levels)
Y
year n S yesterday adv + n M you’re welcome excl F yours pron S
yellow adj S yet adv F young adj S yourself pron F
yes adv S you pron S your poss adj S
Z
zero n F
zoo n S
54 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 57 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED THEMATIC
Starters, Movers and Flyers
combined thematic vocabulary list
N.B. For a comprehensive vocabulary list, see the alphabetic combined list on p48.
Starters Movers Flyers
Animals
animal hippo bat rabbit butterfly
bird horse bear shark camel
cat lizard cage whale dinosaur
chicken monkey dolphin extinct
cow mouse/mice fly fur
crocodile sheep (s + pl) jungle insect
dog snake kangaroo octopus
duck spider kitten swan
elephant tail lion wild
fish (s + pl) tiger panda wing
frog zoo parrot
giraffe pet
goat puppy
The body and
arm hand back neck finger
the face
body head beard shoulder toe
ear leg blond(e) stomach
eye mouth curly straight
face nose fair thin
foot/feet smile fat tooth/teeth
hair moustache
Clothes
bag shirt coat belt spotted
clothes shoe scarf crown stripe
dress skirt sweater glove striped
glasses sock necklace sunglasses
handbag trousers pocket tights
hat T-shirt ring umbrella
jacket watch shorts uniform
jeans wear spot
Colours
black orange bright (of colour) striped
blue pink gold
brown purple silver
colour red spot
green white spotted
grey (US gray) yellow stripe
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 55

===== PAGE 58 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED THEMATIC
Starters Movers Flyers
Family &
baby grandmother aunt get married
Friends
boy grandpa daughter husband
brother live grandchild(ren) married
child/children man/men granddaughter partner
cousin mother grandparent surname
dad(dy) mum(my) grandson wife
family old grown-up
father person/people parent
friend sister son
girl woman/women uncle
grandfather young
grandma
Food & drink
apple ice cream bottle biscuit (US cookie)
banana juice bowl butter
bean lemon cheese chopsticks
bread lemonade coffee cookie (UK biscuit)
breakfast lime cup flour
burger lunch glass fork
cake mango hungry honey
candy (UK / meat pasta jam
sweet(s)) milk picnic knife
carrot onion plate meal
chicken orange salad pepper
chips (US fries) pea sandwich piece
chocolate pear soup pizza
coconut pineapple tea salt
dinner potato thirsty smell
drink rice vegetable snack
eat sausage spoon
egg supper sugar
fish sweet(s) (US taste
food candy)
fries (UK chips) tomato
fruit water
grape watermelon
Health
cold hurt chemist (’s)
cough matter (what’s cut
cry the matter?) dentist
doctor nurse fall over
earache stomach-ache ill
fall temperature medicine
fine tired
headache toothache
hospital
56 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 59 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED THEMATIC
Starters Movers Flyers
The home
apartment (UK flat) home address upstairs brush
armchair house balcony wash comb
bath kitchen basement cooker
bathroom lamp blanket diary
bed living room CD player entrance
bedroom mat downstairs envelope
bookcase mirror dream fridge
box painting DVD player gate
camera phone elevator (UK lift) key
chair picture fan letter
clock radio floor (e.g. ground, screen
computer room 1st, etc.) shelf
cupboard sleep internet soap
desk sofa lift (UK elevator) stamp
dining room table message swing
doll television/TV roof telephone
door toy seat toilet
flat (US apartment) tree shower
flower wall stair(s)
garden watch toothbrush
hall window towel
Materials
card plastic
glass silver
gold wood
metal wool
paper
Names
Alex Lucy Charlie Paul Betty Richard
Ann May Daisy Peter David Robert
Anna Nick Fred Sally Emma Sarah
Ben Pat Jack Vicky George William
Bill Sam Jane Harry
Dan Sue Jim Helen
Grace Tom John Holly
Jill Tony Lily Katy
Kim Mary Michael
Numbers
1–20 21–100 pair 101–1,000 several
hundred 1st–20th 21st–31st thousand
million
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 57

===== PAGE 60 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED THEMATIC
Starters Movers Flyers
Places &
behind above square airport left
directions
between bank station bridge London
bookshop below straight building metre
here bus station supermarket bus stop (US meter)
in bus stop swimming pool castle middle
in front of café town/city centre centimetre museum
next to centre (US centimeter) north
on cinema chemist(’s) over
park circle circus path
playground city/town centre club police station
shop (US store) farm college post office
store (UK shop) hospital corner restaurant
street library east right
there map end south
under market factory straight on
zoo near fire station theatre
opposite front university
place get to way
road hotel west
shopping centre kilometre
sports centre (US kilometer)
School
alphabet look break art
answer mouse (computer) homework backpack (UK rucksack)
ask music internet bin
board number mistake club
book open text college
bookcase page website competition
class part dictionary
classroom pen exam
close pencil fact
colour picture flag
computer playground geography
correct question glue
cross read group
cupboard right (as in correct) headteacher
desk rubber (US eraser) history
door ruler language
draw school maths (US math)
English sentence online
eraser (UK rubber) sit rucksack (US backpack)
example spell science
find stand scissors
floor story screen
keyboard teacher shelf
(computer) tell student
know test study
learn tick subject
lesson understand teach
letter (as in wall timetable
alphabet) window university
line word
listen write
58 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 61 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED THEMATIC
Starters Movers Flyers
Sports &
badminton music bat towel backpack (UK score
leisure
ball paint(ing) band (music) video rucksack) ski (n + v)
baseball photo cinema walk (n) cartoon sledge
basketball piano CD channel snowball
beach picture CD player chess snowboarding
bike play comic/comic book collect snowman
boat radio dance concert stage (theatre)
book read drive (n) diary suitcase
bounce ride (v) DVD drum swing
camera run DVD player flashlight tape recorder
catch sing email (UK torch) team
doll soccer film (US movie) goal tent
draw(ing) (UK football) fish golf torch
drive (v) song go shopping hotel (US flashlight)
enjoy sport holiday instrument umbrella
favourite story hop join (a club) violin
fishing swim (v) kick (n) magazine volleyball
fly table tennis movie (UK film) match (football) winner
football take a photo/ party meet
(US soccer) picture pool member
game television/TV present online
guitar tennis ride (n) player
hit throw sail prize
hobby toy skate programme
hockey walk (v) skip (US program)
jump watch sports centre pyramid
kick (v) swim (n) race
kite swimming pool rucksack
listen text (US backpack)
Time
afternoon after The days a.m. quarter
birthday always of the week: ago spring
clock before Sunday autumn (US fall) summer
day every Monday calendar time
end never Tuesday century tomorrow
evening sometimes Wednesday Christmas tonight
in week Thursday date winter
morning weekend Friday early The months
night yesterday Saturday fall (UK autumn) of the year:
today future January
watch half February
year hour March
How long April
late May
later June
midday July
midnight August
minute September
month October
o’clock November
p.m. December
past
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 59

===== PAGE 62 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED THEMATIC
Starters Movers Flyers
Toys
alien helicopter crown
ball kite
balloon lorry (US truck)
baseball monster
basketball plane
bike robot
boat soccer (UK
car football)
doll toy
football (US train
soccer) truck (UK lorry)
game
Transport
bike lorry (US truck) bus station airport railway
boat motorbike bus stop ambulance rocket
bus plane drive (n) bicycle taxi
car ride (v) driver fire engine (US fire timetable
drive (v) run ride (n) truck) tour
fly swim station journey traffic
go train ticket lift (ride) wheel
helicopter truck (UK lorry) trip passenger
Weather
sun cloud sunny fog
cloudy weather foggy
rain wind ice
rainbow windy sky
snow storm
Work
teacher clown actor journalist
doctor airport mechanic
driver ambulance meeting
farmer artist news
hospital astronaut newspaper
nurse business office
pirate businessman/ painter
work woman photographer
circus pilot
cook police station
dentist policeman/
engineer woman
factory queen
fire engine (US fire rocket
truck) secretary
fireman/woman singer
footballer taxi
job waiter
The world
beach city mountain air gate
around us
sand country(side) plant bridge hill
sea field river building planet
shell forest road castle pyramid
street grass rock cave sky
sun ground star desert space
tree island town entrance view
water jungle village environment wood
lake waterfall exit
leaf/leaves world fire
moon future
60 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 63 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED GRAMATICAL
Starters, Movers and Flyers
combined grammatical vocabulary list
Starters Movers Flyers
Nouns
afternoon chicken address fan actor (UK biscuit)
Alex child/children age farm adventure corner
alien chips (US fries) aunt farmer advice crown
alphabet chocolate back field air date
animal class balcony film (US movie) airport David
Ann classroom band (music) floor (e.g. ground, ambulance December
Anna clock bank 1st etc.) April dentist
answer clothes basement fly art desert
apartment coconut bat forest artist diary
(UK flat) colour bear Fred astronaut dictionary
apple computer beard Friday August dinosaur
arm cousin blanket glass autumn (US fall) drum
armchair cow bottle grandchild(ren) backback (UK east
baby crocodile bottom granddaughter rucksack) Emma
badminton cross bowl grandparent belt engineer
bag cupboard break grandson Betty entrance
ball dad(dy) bus station grass bicycle envelope
balloon Dan bus stop ground bin environment
banana day café grown-up biscuit exam
baseball desk cage headache (US cookie) exit
basketball dining room CD holiday bit fact
bath dinner CD player homework bridge factory
bathroom dog centre hospital brush February
beach doll Charlie hundred building fall (UK autumn)
bean door cheese idea business finger
bed drawing cinema inside businessman/ fire
bedroom dress circle internet woman fire engine (US fire
Ben drink city island butter truck)
bike duck city/town centre Jack butterfly fire station
Bill ear cloud Jane calendar fireman/woman
bird egg clown Jim camel flag
birthday elephant coat John card flashlight
board end coffee jungle cartoon (UK torch)
boat English cold kangaroo castle flour
body eraser (UK comic/comic book kick cave fog
book rubber) cough kind centimetre footballer
bookcase evening country(side) kitten (US centimeter) fork
bookshop example cup lake century fridge
box eye Daisy laugh channel front
boy face daughter leaf/leaves chemist(’s) fun
bread family difference library chess fur
breakfast father doctor lift (US elevator) chopsticks future
brother fish (s + pl) dolphin Lily Christmas gate
burger fishing downstairs lion circus geography
bus flat (US dream map club George
cake apartment) drive market college glove
camera floor driver Mary comb glue
candy (UK flower DVD matter competition goal
sweet(s)) food DVD player message concert gold
car foot/feet earache mistake conversation golf
carrot football (US elevator (UK Monday cook group
cat soccer) lift) moon cooker guess
chair friend email mountain cookie half
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 61

===== PAGE 64 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED GRAMATICAL
Starters Movers Flyers
Nouns
fries (UK chips) meat moustache swimming pool Harry October
cont.
frog milk movie (UK film) tea headteacher octopus
fruit mirror neck temperature Helen office
game monkey noise text hill painter
garden monster nurse thing history paper
giraffe morning outside Thursday Holly partner
girl mother pair ticket honey passenger
glasses motorbike panda tooth/teeth hotel past
goat mouse/mice parent toothache hour path
Grace mouse parrot toothbrush husband pepper
grandfather (computer) party top ice photographer
grandma mouth pasta towel information piece
grandmother mum(my) Paul town insect pilot
grandpa music pet town/city centre instrument pizza
grape name Peter treasure jam planet
guitar Nick picnic trip January plastic
hair night pirate Tuesday job player
hall nose place uncle journalist pocket
hand number plant upstairs journey police station
handbag onion plate vegetable July policeman/
hat orange pool Vicky June woman
head page present video Katy post office
helicopter paint puppy village key postcard
hippo painting rabbit walk kilometre prize
hobby park rain wash (US kilometer) problem
hockey part rainbow waterfall king programme
home Pat ride weather knife (US program)
horse pea river website language pyramid
house pear road Wednesday letter (as in mail) quarter
ice cream pen rock week lift (ride) queen
jacket pencil roof weekend light race
jeans person/people sail whale London railway
Jill phone salad wind magazine restaurant
juice photo Sally work March Richard
keyboard piano sandwich world match (football) ring
(computer) picture Saturday yesterday maths (US math) Robert
Kim pineapple scarf May (as in month) rocket
kitchen plane seat meal rucksack (US
kite playground shark mechanic backpack)
lamp potato shopping medicine salt
leg question shopping centre meeting Sarah
lemon radio shoulder member science
lemonade rice shower metal scissors
lesson robot skate metre (US meter) score
letter (as in room snow Michael screen
alphabet) rubber son midday secret
lime (US eraser) soup middle secretary
line ruler sports centre midnight September
living room Sam square million shelf
lizard sand stair(s) minute shorts
lorry (US truck) sausage star money silver
Lucy school station month singer
lunch sea stomach museum ski
man/men sentence stomach-ache necklace sky
mango sheep (s + pl) Sunday news sledge
mat shell supermarket newspaper smell
May (as in shirt sweater north snack
girl’s name) shoe swim November snowball
62 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 65 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED GRAMATICAL
Starters Movers Flyers
Nouns
shop (US store) tiger snowboarding tights
cont. sister today snowman time
skirt Tom soap timetable
smile tomato sound toe
snake Tony south toilet
soccer (UK toy space tomorrow
football) train spoon tonight
sock tree spot torch
sofa trousers spring (US flashlight)
song truck (UK lorry) stage tour
spider try stamp traffic
sport T-shirt storm umbrella
store (UK shop) tv/television stripe uniform
story wall student university
street watch subject view
Sue water sugar violin
sun watermelon suitcase volleyball
supper window summer waiter
sweet(s) woman/women sunglasses way
(US candy) word surname west
table year swan wheel
table tennis zoo swing wife
tail tape recorder William
teacher taste wing
television/TV taxi winner
tennis team winter
test telephone wish
tick tent wood
theatre wool
thousand zero
Adjectives
angry OK afraid frightened alone heavy
beautiful old all hot bored high
big open all right hungry brave horrible
black orange awake last bright (of colour) ill
blue our back loud broken important
brown pink bad naughty cheap interesting
clean purple best pretty dangerous kind
closed red better quick dark large
correct right (as in blond(e) quiet dear late
dirty correct) boring round early lazy
double sad bottom safe empty left (as in
English short busy second enough direction)
favourite small careful slow excellent light
funny sorry clever square excited little
good their cloudy straight expensive lovely
gray (UK grey) ugly cold strong extinct low
great white curly sunny far lucky
green yellow different surprised fast married
grey (US gray) young difficult sweet foggy metal
happy your dry tall friendly middle
her easy terrible front missing
his exciting thin full next
its famous third fun noisy
long fair thirsty glass normal
my fat tired gold online
new fine top half paper
nice first weak hard plastic
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 63

===== PAGE 66 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED GRAMATICAL
Starters Movers Flyers
Adjectives well worst poor strange
cont. wet wrong popular striped
windy ready sure
worse rich tidy
right (as in unfriendly
direction) unhappy
same untidy
several unusual
silver warm
single wild
soft wonderful
special worried
spotted
Determiners
a/an some all most each
a lot of that another a few
lots of the any a little
many these both much
no this every other
one those more such
Adverbs again all off actually next
here all right often after nowhere
home always on ago o’clock
a lot back only already of course
lots badly out also once
no best outside anywhere over
not better quickly away perhaps
now carefully quietly before quite
really down round early so
there downstairs second else somewhere
today first slowly ever soon
too how sometimes everywhere still
very how much then far straight on
yes how often third fast suddenly
inside up hard together
last upstairs how long tomorrow
loudly well just tonight
more when late twice
most worse later usually
near worst a little yet
never yesterday much
Prepositions
about like above off across
at (prep of place) next to after on (prep of time) during
behind of at (prep of time) opposite for (prep of time)
between on (prep of place) before out of over
for to below outside past
from under by round since
in (prep of place with down than through
and time) inside up until
in front of into without
near
Conjunctions
and or because when after if
but than before so
64 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 67 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED GRAMATICAL
Starters Movers Flyers
Pronouns
he ours all anyone
her she another anything
hers that any each
him theirs both enough
his them everyone herself
I these everything himself
it they more itself
its this most much
a lot those nothing myself
lots us someone no-one
me we something other
mine you which where
one yours who yourself
Verbs –
irregular be let’s be called be going to send
can make bring begin should
catch (e.g. a ball) put buy break smell
choose read catch (e.g. a bus) cut speak
come ride dry fall over spend
do run fall feel steal
draw say get (un)dressed find out swing
drink see get (up/on/off) forget take (as in time)
drive sing go shopping get married teach
eat sit have (got) to get to win
find sleep hide go out
fly spell hurt grow
get stand lose hear
give swim mean keep
go take a photo/ must leave
have picture put on let
have got tell take lie (as in lie down)
hit throw take off make sure
hold understand think meet
know wear wake up send
learn write sell
Verbs –
regular add open call move agree hate
answer paint carry need arrive hope
ask phone change plant believe hurry
bounce pick up climb rain brush improve
clean play cook sail burn join (a club)
close point cry shop camp lift
colour show dance shout collect look after
complete smile dream skate comb look (like)
cross start dress up skip decide mind
enjoy stop drop snow describe mix
jump talk email text end post
kick test film travel explain prefer
like tick fish video fetch prepare
listen try help wait finish pull
live walk hop wash follow push
look want invite work glue race
look (at) watch laugh guess remember
love wave look for happen repair
CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS 65

===== PAGE 68 =====
STARTERS, MOVERS & FLYERS | COMBINED GRAMATICAL
Starters Movers Flyers
Verbs –
repeat thank
regular
save tidy
cont.
score turn
ski turn (off/on)
sledge use
sound visit
sound like whisper
stay whistle
study wish
taste
taste like
Modals
can/cannot/can’t could (as in past of can for ability) could (for possibility)
must may
shall might
would should
will
Question
words how where how much how long
how many which how often
how old who when
what whose why
66 CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH: YOUNG LEARNERS HANDBOOK FOR TEACHERS

===== PAGE 69 =====
Cambridge English: Young Learners, also known as Young Learners
English (YLE), is at Levels A1-A2 of the Common European
Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR) published by the
Council of Europe.
University of Cambridge
ESOL Examinations
1 Hills Road
Cambridge
CB1 2EU
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 1223 553997
Email: ESOLhelpdesk@CambridgeESOL.org
www.CambridgeESOL.org
*0830789617* Handbook
for
Teachers
Cambridge
English
Young
Learners
© UCLES 2012 | EMC/1932/2Y02
ISBN 978-1-907870-24-8
9 781907 870248
